CODE OF ORDINANCES CHEROKEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted December 30, 1994 
Effective December 30, 1994 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
CHEROKEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
L.B. (Buzz) Ahrens, Chairman 
Steve West, District 1 Commissioner 
Raymond Gunnin, District 2 Commissioner 
Bob Kovacs, District 3 Commissioner 
K. Scott Gordon, District 4 Commissioner 
____________ 
Jerry W. Cooper, County Manager 
____________ 
Christy Black, County Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4295, which created a new board of commissioners for the county. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Section catchlines have been supplied by the editor. Any other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Creation. 
There is created in and for the County of Cherokee a chairman and board of commissioners to be elected and organized as provided for in this Act. The chairman and board of commissioners shall constitute the governing authority of Cherokee County and shall exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities vested in and upon said officers by the provisions of this Act. The term "board" or the term "commission," whenever used in this Act, shall mean the board of commissioners of Cherokee County, including the chairman and all members. 
Section 2. - Membership; districts; qualifications of members. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Cherokee County shall consist of five members. One of the members shall be the chairman and shall be elected by a majority of the registered voters of the county voting in the election. Each candidate for the other four positions must be a resident of the commissioner district created by this section which such person offers to represent and shall be elected by the registered voters of the Eastern District or the Western District of Cherokee County, whichever includes the commissioner district to which such candidate seeks election. For the purpose of electing members of the board of commissioners, Cherokee County is divided into an Eastern District and a Western District. The county is further divided into four commissioner districts, such that the Eastern District contains Commissioner Districts Nos. 1 and 2 and the Western District contains Commissioner Districts Nos. 3 and 4. Persons offering for commissioner districts shall be elected by majority vote. 
(b)  The Eastern District shall be composed of the territory included in Commissioner Districts 1 and 2. The Western District shall be composed of the territory included in Commissioner Districts 3 and 4. 
(c)  Commissioner Districts 1 through 4 shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: chercc3, Plan Type: Local User: Shantee, Administrator: Cherokee. 
(d)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and desrcibe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Cherokee County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Cherokee County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 as they existed on January 1, 2002, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and, on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Act. 
(f)  The chairman shall be a citizen of this state who has attained the age of 30 years and who has been a resident of Cherokee County for not less than two years next preceding his election and shall hold no other elective public office. 
(g)  Members of the commission, other than the chairman, shall be citizens of this state who have attained the age of 21 years and who have been residents of their respective commissioner districts for not less than one year preceding their election and shall hold no other elective public office. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5036; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4878) 
Section 3. - Term of office of commissioners. 
(a)  The members of the board of commissioners in office on January 1, 2002, representing former Commissioner Districts 1 and 4 shall serve out the remainder of the terms to which they were elected, such terms expiring on December 31, 2002. At the general election in 2002 and every four years thereafter, members of the board shall be elected from Commissioner Districts 1 and 4 pursuant to this Act and shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on January 1, immediately following their election. 
(b)  The members of the board of commissioners in office on January 1, 2002, representing former Commissioner Districts 2 and 3 shall serve out the remainder of the terms to which they were elected, such terms expiring on Decmber 31, 2004. At the general election in 2004 and every four years thereafter, members of the board shall be elected from Commissioner Districts 2 and 3 pursuant to this Act and shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on January 1, immediately following their election. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5036; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4878) 
Section 4. - Term of office of chairman; resignation of members seeking other elective office. 
(a)  The chairman of the commission in office on January 1, 1992, shall serve out the remainder of the term to which he was elected, such term expiring on December 31, 1994. At the general election in 1994 and every four years thereafter, the chairman shall be elected pursuant to this Act and shall serve for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified and shall take office on January 1, immediately following his election. 
(b)  Neither the chairman nor any commissioner shall be qualified to offer for election to any position the term of office of which begins more than 30 days prior to the expiration of such chairman's or commissioner's present term of office without first resigning from the position in which he at that time is serving. 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 3882; 1992 Ga. Laws, page 5036) 
Section 5. - Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of chairman or a commissioner whose unexpired term exceeds 180 days, it shall be the duty of the election superintendent of Cherokee County to call a special election for the filling of such vacancy, which election shall be governed by Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540 et seq.] In the event such unexpired term does not exceed 180 days, it shall be the duty of the remaining members of the commission to fill the vacancy by appointment. All persons elected or appointed to fill vacancies pursuant to the provisions of this section shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of any such office and shall possess the residency and other qualifications required for such office. 
Section 6. - Oath and bond of members. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairman and commissioners shall subscribe an oath before the probate judge of said county for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition, the chairman shall further give a satisfactory surety bond to the probate judge of the county and payable to Cherokee County, Georgia and filed in the office of the probate judge, in the sum of $50,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. Each commissioner shall give like bond in the sum of $10,000.00. The costs of said bonds shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-001, § 1, 1-3-17) 
Section 7. - Compensation of members. 
(a)  Commissioners, other than the chairman, shall be paid an annual salary of $30,000.00. Such compensation shall be paid on a monthly basis out of the county treasury upon warrants drawn upon the county treasury. 
(b)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall receive an annual salary in the amount of $38,000.00, to be paid out of the county treasury upon warrants drawn upon the county treasury. 
(c)  The chairman and the commissioners may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their duties. Such expenses shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Mileage reimbursement for the use of a personal automobile while conducting county business; 
(2)  Secretarial services, if required, over and above services normally provided by the county; and 
(3)  Travel and lodging expenses and fees incurred in conjunction with training seminars, conventions, or county business conducted outside of Cherokee County. 
(d)  Expenses may be reimbursed only after the submission of receipts for said expenses to the county clerk and the approval by majority vote of the commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. The chairman and commissioners shall be entitled to compensation for serving on any other boards or authorities for which their membership is provided by law. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may choose to attend any seminar or training session that it feels will improve the manner in which it discharges and conducts its lawful duties. The expenses incurred from attending such seminar or training session shall be reimbursed by the county out of the county funds subject to the above requirements of submission of receipts and commission approval. 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 3882; Min. of 3-21-06; Min. of 4-18-06; Min. of 7-5-06) 
Section 8. - Vice chairman. 
At the first regular meeting of each year, the board of commissioners shall elect from its members a vice chairman. In the event of death, disqualification, or resignation of the chairman, the vice chairman shall perform the duties and authority of the chairman until a new chairman is chosen as provided in this Act. The vice chairman shall preside at meetings of the board of commissioners in the absence of the chairman and shall serve for the calendar year in which elected. In the event of a vacancy in the office of vice chairman, the board of commissioners shall elect a new vice chairman to serve for the remainder of calendar year. 
Section 9. - Meetings; rules of procedure. 
The board of commissioners shall hold two regular meetings each month at the county seat, which meetings shall be open to the public. The time, date, and place of the meetings shall be determined by the board in the first meeting of the year. Any resolution passed by the board regarding the date, time, and place of its monthly meetings shall be published in the official county organ once a week for two weeks during a period of 30 days immediately following the passage of the resolution. The board of commissioners may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairman or any three commissioners, provided all members of the commission shall have been notified at least three days in advance of such special meeting which is open to the public. Any three commissioners or the chairman and any two commissioners shall constitute a quorum. No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the commission and except upon compliance with Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3], relating to open meetings. The chairman shall be entitled to the same voting rights as other members of the board of commissioners on questions considered by the commission. All regular and called meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order. 
Section 10. - Duties of chairman. 
The chairman shall be the chief elective officer of the county government and shall preside over the meetings of the board of commissioners. The duties of the chairman shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintaining an office in the administrative center; 
(2)  Presiding at all public meetings; 
(3)  Representing the county government at ceremonial functions; 
(4)  Being available to the constituency on a regular basis; 
(5)  Coordinating intergovernment activity among municipalities, other counties, the state, and the United States and any agencies thereof; 
(6)  Being empowered to submit motions to the board of commissioners for action; 
(7)  Sharing equal responsibility with other commissioners for budget approval and amendments and the approval of the board of commissioners staff additions or separations; 
(8)  Taking the lead role in initiating needs assessments, evaluations of county services, and policy development; and 
(9)  Appointing subcommittee chairmen with the approval of the commission. 
Section 11. - General powers. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, policies, rules, and regulations governing all matters reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction. Such policies, rules, and regulations, when so adopted with proper entry thereof made on the minutes of the board of commissioners, shall be conclusive and binding. The board of commissioners shall exercise only those administrative powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its functions as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions. The following powers are vested in the board of commissioners and reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction: 
(1)  To levy taxes; 
(2)  To make appropriations; 
(3)  To fix rates and charges for services provided by the county; 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)  To order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)  To authorize and provide for the execution of contracts; 
(7)  To establish, alter, open, close, build, repair, or abolish public roads, bridges, and ferries, according to law; provided, however, that the chairman shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the board of commissioners for subdivisions have been met; 
(8)  To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law; 
(9)  To accept, for the county, the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of the county; 
(10)  To exercise all powers, duty, and authority formerly imposed upon or vested in the commissioner of roads and revenues of Cherokee County in respect to zoning and planning; 
(11)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; 
(12)  To fix the bonds of county officers where same are not fixed by statute; 
(13)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation which the county may be given authority to enact; 
(14)  To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(15)  To call elections for the voting of bonds; 
(16)  To exercise all of the power and authority formerly vested by law in the commissioner of Cherokee County together with the power and authority which may be delegated by law to the governing authority of the county, by whatever name designated; 
(17)  To appoint retained legal counsel and an independent county auditor and provide for their compensation; and 
(18)  To require all county officers to report on the general or specific conduct of the financial affairs of their respective offices. 
Section 11A. - When commissioners required to abstain from voting. 
In the event that any commissioner is not reelected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of such member's term of office, during the interim between the election of a successor and the taking of office of such successor, the retiring commissioner for such seat shall be required to abstain from voting on actions which: 
(1)  Add personnel to the county payroll, either by creation of new positions or by filling any position which has been vacant for more than 30 days prior to the election; 
(2)  Increase the salary or other compensation of any county employee; 
(3)  Borrow funds in excess of the amount necessary to pay usual county expenditures for the remainder of such commissioner's term; 
(4)  Purchase new or used equipment for the county, except that the commissioner may negotiate and complete any such purchase pending at the time of such election or for which notice had been published in the legal organ of the county or a newspaper of general circulation in the county prior to the date of the election; 
(5)  Dispose of any county property, real or personal, in any manner unless such disposal was properly announced and notice had been published in the legal organ of the county or a newspaper of general circulation in the county prior to the date of the election; or 
(6)  Remove any county records or public files from the office of the commissioner for that seat prior to vacating such office. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3759) 
Section 12. - County manager. 
(a)  There is created the office of county manager of Cherokee County. The qualifications, method of selection, appointment, term of office, compensation, procedure for removal or suspension, method of filling vacancies, and other related matters pertaining to the office of county manager shall be provided for by resolution of the board of commissioners of Cherokee County. 
(b)  In its discretion, the board of commissioners of Cherokee County may select a person for the office of county manager solely upon the person's executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect of the duties of the office. In its discretion, the board of commissioners may require any person appointed to the office of county manager to hold a bachelor's degree in public administration, business administration, accounting, finance, or related fields and possess at least three years' experience as a county or city manager or as an assistant county or city manager; or the board of commissioners may require any person appointed to the office of county manager to hold a master's degree in any of the aforementioned fields and possess at least two years' experience as a county or city manager or as an assistant county or city manager. 
(c)  The county manager shall be the chief executive officer of Cherokee County and he shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county, except as otherwise provided by law. It shall be the duty of the county manager to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the county are enforced; 
(2)  Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board or chairman of the board has heretofore exercised or that may hereafter be created, except as otherwise provided in this Act; 
(3)  Keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the county; 
(4)  Supervise and direct the official conduct of all appointive county officers and department heads, except as may be otherwise provided in this Act; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the board with the right to take part in the discussions, provided that the county manager shall have no vote on any matter or issue before the board; 
(6)  Supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for Cherokee County and to supervise and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for Cherokee County within such limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the board of commissioners, provided that the county manager is authorized to make purchases and contracts for the county in amounts not exceeding $2,500.00; 
(7)  Devote his entire time to the duties and affairs of his office and hold no other office or employment for remuneration while so engaged; and 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the board of commissioners. 
Section 13. - Sealed bids required for certain purchases. 
All purchases of Cherokee County shall be governed by all applicable general laws of the State of Georgia and also by any such ordinance or resolution as may be adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. and Ord. of 10-20-2015, § 1) 
Section 14. - Authority regarding organization of county government. 
The internal organization of the county government shall be established and altered by the board of commissioners. Existing departments may be abolished and their functions transferred to other departments, additional departments may be created, and any two or more departments may be consolidated. 
Section 15. - Minutes. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a clerk, who shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes. The book of minutes of the commission shall contain all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the commission in chronological order. A similar book of minutes shall be kept which shall contain, in chronological order, all acts, orders, and proceedings of the county manager. The minutes books of the county manager and commission shall be open to the public for inspection at all times during regular office hours; and certified copies of any entries in the minutes books shall be furnished by the clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as are other funds, to be assessed by the commission in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
Section 16. - Adoption of budget. 
The chairman shall submit annually to the commission a proposed budget governing expenditures of all county funds, including capital outlay and public works projects for the following fiscal year. The commission shall thereafter hold a public hearing on the budget,giving notice thereof at least ten days in advance by publication of such notice and of the proposed budget in the official organ of Cherokee County and by posting same at the courthouse door. The budget shall then be reviewed and adopted or amended by the commission prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year to which it applies, which budget, when so adopted or amended by the commission, shall constitute the commission's appropriation of all funds for such year. The budget so adopted may be revised during the year only by formal action of the commission in a regular meeting, and no increase shall be made therein without provision also being made for financing same. The proposed budget submitted by the chairman shall be accompanied by a report containing information and data relating to the financial affairs of the county pertinent to arriving at and establishing the annual budget. A copy of the budget and of each revision or amendment to same shall be transmitted by the chairman to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Cherokee County within ten days from the time such budget or amendment thereof is adopted by the commission. The board of commissioners may from time to time, upon a majority vote thereof, change the ending and beginning date of the fiscal year for the county or may operate on a calendar basis; provided, however, that in the event of such change, the budget shall be submitted at least two months prior to the beginning date of the next fiscal year or January 1, whichever shall apply, and shall be adopted at least one month prior to said beginning date. The procedures for budget preparation, submission to the governing authority, review by the governing authority, public review, notice, and hearings shall be as provided for in Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. 36-81-1 et seq.] 
Section 17. - Conformance with budget required. 
No expenditures of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the commission. The county manager shall enforce compliance with this provision by all departments of county government and to this end shall institute a system of allotments of all moneys appropriated and budgeted. 
Section 18. - Audit of county finances; financial statements. 
The commission shall on or before the final day of the month following the end of each fiscal year employ a certified public accountant for the making of an annual continuous audit of county finances and financial records. The accountant so employed shall be paid out of county funds and shall perform a complete audit of the financial records of the county for the preceding year, pointing out any irregularities found to exist, and reporting the results of such audit to the commission. Each annual report submitted to the commission shall be made available to public inspection as are other records in such office. The commission shall cause to be published in the official organ of Cherokee County and posted at the courthouse door a statement of the financial condition of the county as of December 31 and June 30 of each year. Said accountant shall transmit to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Cherokee County a copy of each annual report furnished by him to the commission. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 411, which created a board of ethics for the county. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Section catchlines have been supplied by the editor. Any other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Findings of fact; purpose of ethical standards. 
(a)  It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the Cherokee County government that public officials be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the Cherokee County public officials. Because the attainment of one or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists in fact, or appears to exist, a conflict between the private interests and public responsibilities of the Cherokee County public officials, the public interest requires that the General Assembly protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing by law appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of such public officials in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(b)  The General Assembly recognizes that an appropriate and effective code of ethics for employees of Cherokee County is also essential for the proper administration and operation of the Cherokee County government. The General Assembly, therefore, urges and expects the commission to provide by ordinance for a code of ethics substantially the same as the one provided by this Act for such employees. 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Business" means a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
(2)  "Confidential information" means any information which by law or practice is not available to the public. 
(3)  "Consultant" means any person not a member of the governing authority who is retained, designated, or specially employed to render personal services of a technical or professional nature, whether paid or unpaid, and who has other personal or private employment. The term "consultant" includes, but is not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, accountants, brokers, financial advisors, and title abstractors. 
(4)  "Contract" means any claim or demand against or any lease, account, or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
(5)  "Emergency situation" means any circumstance or condition giving rise to an immediate necessity for the execution of a contract by and between Cherokee County or a local authority and a public official or between Cherokee County or a local authority and a business in which a public official has an interest and where, to the satisfaction of the head of the affected county office, it is shown that there is no one other than such persons with whom the contract could have been made and that the necessity was not brought about by such persons' own fault or neglect. 
(6)  "Immediate family" means an individual and the individual's spouse and their parents, children, brothers, and sisters. 
(7)  "Interest" means any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to a public official or to a member of the board of ethics as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with Cherokee County or a local authority. Unless otherwise provided in this section, the term "interest" does not include any remote interest. A public official or a member of the board of ethics shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(A)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(B)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefit; 
(C)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee, or shareholder; or 
(D)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(8)  "Local authority" means an authority described in paragraph (14) of this section. 
(9)  "Official act or action" means any legislative, administrative, appointive, or discretionary act of a public official. 
(10)  "Paid" means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary, commission, or percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
(11)  "Participate" means to take part in official acts, actions, or proceedings personally as a member of the governing authority through approval, disapproval, decision, recommendation, investigation, the rendering of advice, or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
(12)  "Person" means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any public official. 
(13)  "Property" means any property, whether real or personal, or tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
(14)  "Public official" means the members of the board of commissioners and their appointees to all boards, commissions and authorities, including, but not limited to the following boards, commissions and authorities: the county manager of Cherokee County; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Airport Authority; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Development Authority; the chairman and every member of the Development Authority of Cherokee County, the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Animal Control Advisory Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Board of Health; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Board of Tax Assessors; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Board of Family and Children Services; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Recreation and Parks Advisory Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Construction Board of Appeals; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Fire Code Appeals Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Impact Fee Appeals Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Planning Commission; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Region 1 EMS Advisory Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Wrecker Service Advisory and Appeals Board; the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County RRDA Resource and Recovery Development Authority; and the chairman and every member of the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Public Official means any member of a board or authority appointed by the board of commissioners, the county manager or any other appointed officer or official of the county. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term shall not apply to any other county elected or state elected official unless that elected official or officials agree that he or she will be subject to coverage under this ordinance in writing. Such coverage may also apply to the employees of such other county or state elected officials when so agreed in writing. Further, for the purposes of this ordinance, the term shall not apply to the ethics board. 
(Res. No. 2015-R-013, § 1) 
(15)  "Remote interest" means the interest of: 
(A)  A nonsalaried director, officer, or employee of a nonprofit corporation; 
(B)  A holder of less than 5 percent of the legal or beneficial ownership of the total shares of a business; 
(C)  Any person in a representative capacity, such as a receiver, trustee, or administrator; or 
(D)  Any person who, by determinations of the board of ethics, is deemed to have such an interest. 
(16)  "Transaction" means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of a public official. 
Section 3. - Conflict of interest. 
No public official shall: 
(1)  By his conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of his official acts or actions or that he is affected unduly by the rank or position of or kinship or association with any person; 
(2)  (A)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if: 
(i)  It tends to influence him in the discharge of his official duties; or 
(ii)  He recently has been, is now, or in the near future may be involved in any official act or action directly affecting the donor or lender. 
(B)  Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not apply in the case of: 
(i)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(ii)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or 
(iii)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Appear on his own personal behalf, or represent, advise, or appear on the personal behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person before any court or before any legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial board, agency, commission, or committee of the state or of any county or municipality concerning any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of Cherokee County or a local authority or otherwise use or attempt to use his official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or other persons; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties. For the purposes of this paragraph, the employment of a consultant by any business involving matters unrelated to any contract or transaction by or with Cherokee County or a local authority shall not be deemed incompatible with such consultant's official duties; 
(6)  Acquire an interest in any contract or transaction at a time when he believes or has reason to believe that such an interest will be affected directly or indirectly by his official act or actions or by the official acts or actions of Cherokee County or a local authority; or 
(7)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of his being a public official. 
Section 4. - Disclosure of interest. 
A public official who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of Cherokee County or a local authority shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest by sworn written statement to the board of ethics and ask for its opinion as to the propriety of said interest. Every public official who knowingly has any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract to which Cherokee County or a local authority is or is about to become a party, or in any other business with Cherokee County or a local authority, shall make full disclosure of such interest to Cherokee County or the local authority, as applicable, and to the board of ethics. The information disclosed by such sworn statements, except for the valuation attributed to the disclosed interest, shall be made a matter of public record by the board of ethics. 
Section 5. - Disqualification from participation in official action. 
A public official shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of Cherokee County or a local authority directly affecting a business or activity in which he has any interest, whether or not a remote interest. 
Section 6. - Contracts with member of governing body or with business in which member of governing body has interest. 
Neither Cherokee County nor a local authority shall enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of its governing body or with a business in which a member of its governing body has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into with a business which employs a consultant, provided that the consultant's employment with the business is not incompatible with the consultant's official duties under paragraph (3) of Section 2 of this Act; 
(4)  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services; and 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation, provided that a record explaining the emergency is prepared by the public official and submitted to the board of ethics at its next regular meeting and thereafter kept on file. 
Section 7. - Contracts with or acts favorably affecting former members of governing body. 
Neither Cherokee County nor a local authority shall enter into any contract with, or take any official act or action favorably affecting, any person, or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of its governing body. 
Section 8. - Interpretation; severability. 
(a)  This section [Act] shall be construed liberally to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing laws as may relate to the conduct of a public official. 
(b)  The propriety of any official act or action taken by or transaction involving a public official immediately prior to the time this Act shall take effect shall not be affected by the enactment of this Act. 
(c)  The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Section 9. - Board created; membership; organization, staff and budget; powers and duties. 
(a)  There is created the Board of Ethics of Cherokee County to be composed of seven citizens of Cherokee County to be appointed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of Cherokee County for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the county while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the immediately preceding two-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of Cherokee County. 
(b)  Two members of the board of ethics shall be appointed by the chairman of the board of commissioners of Cherokee County and five members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the full membership of the board of commissioners of Cherokee County. At a minimum, two members shall be members of the Republican Party and two members shall be members of the Democratic Party. The initial members of the board of ethics shall be those members appointed pursuant to an Act approved March 28, 1990 (1990 Ga. Laws, page 4745), and each such member shall serve until the expiration of the initial term to which such member was appointed and until such member's successor is appointed and qualified under this Act. Successors to the first members of the board of ethics and future successors shall be appointed by the respective appointing authorities for terms of seven years upon the expiration of the respective terms of office. All members of the board of ethics shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  If a member of the board of ethics ceases to be a resident of Cherokee County, that member's position on the board, by operation of law, shall become vacant upon the establishment of the fact of such nonresidency, if contested, by a court of competent jurisdiction. A vacancy in the board of ethics shall exist by reason of death, resignation, or loss of residency as described in this subsection. A member of the board of ethics may be removed from office during a term only if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the respective appointing authority. 
(d)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation and shall elect from their own membership a chairman and otherwise provide for their own internal organization. The governing authority of Cherokee County shall provide adequate office and meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements and Cherokee County merit system regulations, the board of ethics shall be authorized to employ its own staff and clerical personnel. The governing authority of Cherokee County shall also provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to carry out its duties and responsibilities. The board of ethics shall be a department of the county government and shall be subject to budgetary procedures and requirements in the same manner as are other departments of the county government; provided, however, in exercising its powers and duties under this section, the board of ethics shall be completely independent and shall not be subject to control or supervision by the chairman of the commission, the county manager, the commission, or any other officer, department, or agency of the county government. 
(e)  The board of ethics shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules, and regulations governing its internal organization and the conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation and application of this Act to all persons who seek advice as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the standards imposed in this section. Such opinions shall be binding on the board of ethics in any subsequent complaint concerning the person who sought the opinion and acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion; 
(3)  To prescribe forms for the disclosures required in this section and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this Act; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this Act; 
(5)  To make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated or is about to violate any provisions of this Act; and 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems necessary for it to carry out properly its functions and powers. 
(f)  [Enforcement powers; conduct of hearings.] 
(1)  Any public official who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided for in this Act shall forfeit his office and may be removed from office after notice and hearing by the affirmative vote of five members of the board of ethics. The board of ethics by its own motion or as a result of a complaint filed with the board of ethics by any citizen or by a group of citizens of Cherokee County may make such investigation as it deems proper to carry out its duties under this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection, the board of ethics may hold and conduct hearings, issue subpoenas, examine witnesses, and administer oaths. The board of ethics shall apply to the Superior Court of Cherokee County for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. 
(2)  At any hearing held under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the public official who is adversely affected shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses against the member of the governing authority, and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(g)  [Judicial review of decisions.] 
(1)  Any public official adversely affected by any final decision of the board of ethics under subsection (f) of this section may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this subsection. 
(2)  An action for judicial review may be commenced in the Superior Court of Cherokee County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics becomes final. 
(3)  The effective date of the final decision of the board of ethics shall be postponed pending judicial review [as] provided for in this subsection. 
(4)  The record on review, unless otherwise stipulated by the parties, shall include the original or certified copies of all pleadings, testimony, evidence, exhibits, and other papers presented to or considered by the board of ethics and the findings and decisions of the board of ethics. As to alleged procedural irregularities, evidence may be taken independently by the court. 
(5)  If the court finds no error, it shall affirm the decision of the board of ethics. If it finds that such action was: 
(A)  Arbitrary or capricious; 
(B)  A denial of a statutory right; 
(C)  Contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity; 
(D)  In excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, purposes, or limitation; 
(E)  Not in accord with the procedures or procedural limitations of this section or as otherwise required by law; 
(F)  An abuse or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion, unsupported by substantial evidence when the record is considered as a whole; or 
(G)  Otherwise contrary to law, 
then the court shall hold unlawful and set aside the decision of the board of ethics removing the public official from office. 
(6)  The decision of the trial court shall be subject to appellate review in the same manner and with the same effect as in appeals from a final judgment or decree in any other civil action. 
Section 10. - Limitation of liability. 
No member of the board of ethics, or any person acting on behalf of the board of ethics, shall be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of this ordinance, except in the case of willful or wanton conduct. This limitation of liability shall apply to the members of the Cherokee County Board of Ethics, the employees of said Board of Ethics, and any person acting under the direction of the Board of Ethics. 
(Res. No. 2015-R-013, § 2) 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4650 which authorizes the county to impose business and occupational license taxes and license fees upon persons doing business in the unincorporated area of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Authority of governing body; exemptions. 
(a)  The governing authority of Cherokee County is authorized to levy, assess, and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees from all persons, firms, and corporations doing business in the unincorporated area of Cherokee County, except those businesses specifically exempted by this Act. 
(b)  The following businesses shall be exempt from taxes and fees imposed under this Act: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.]; and 
(3)  Those businesses upon which local license taxes or license fees are imposed under general laws authorizing such local license taxes and license fees, unless such general law specifically authorizes local license taxes and license fees other than those to which it specifically relates. 
(c)  The governing authority of Cherokee County is authorized to classify businesses and to assess different taxes and fees against different classes of businesses being carried on in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(d)  The governing authority of Cherokee County is authorized to enact ordinances for the enforcement of this Act and for the exercise of police powers over all businesses subject to the imposition of taxes or fees under this Act and to provide for the punishment of violations of such ordinances. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 
Below is a chronological listing of the ordinances or other material of the county used in the Related Laws. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board and board of commissioners. The terms "board" and "board of commissioners" mean the board of commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; in all bonds where the names of the obligers do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted, and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether the court is the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governor. The term "governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Legislative intent. In all interpretations of this Code or of ordinances or resolutions, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in mind at all times the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate any provision, and a transposition of words and phrases may be resorted to when a clause or sentence is without meaning as it stands. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Cherokee County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
Officer. The term "officer" includes those officials appointed by the board of commissioners on a parttime or temporary basis, including the county attorney and municipal court judge. 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read as "and," and the word "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to buildings or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean, generally, next before and next after, unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Requirements. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed controlling. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-of-way which is improved and designated for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature and subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The terms "state," "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name a street is commonly known by, or any public place and the approaches thereto within the county when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory hereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Titles of offices. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of Cherokee County, Georgia." 
Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise provided. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act, omission or order, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances, offenses, etc., not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  Any subdivision ordinance. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance passed by the board of commissioners of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided for by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. However, in no event shall the maximum penalties and punishment exceed a fine of $1,000.00 and an imprisonment in the county jail for 60 days for any single offense. 
(b)  Any violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement adopted pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act may be fined up to $1,000.00 per day for each violation by an industrial user. 
(c)  Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation, or order of the county shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a fine or penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this Code or any ordinance that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(f)  It is the express intent of this section to incorporate any ordinance passed by the board of commissioners into this Code such that, in accordance with paragraph (a) above, the penalties provided in this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 96-02, 1-26-96; Ord. No. 96-18, § 1, 11-22-96; Ord. No. 2017-O-008, § 1, 11-7-17) 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 1; county officers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; supplementary powers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Time and place of meetings of board of commissioners. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the board. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or any two members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)  Meetings shall be held at the Administration Building at 1130 Bluffs Parkway, Canton, Georgia. 
Editor's note— Days and time of meetings changed in minutes from the year 2002, per city instruction. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Agenda for meetings of board of commissioners; addressing board. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each meeting of the board of commissioners. The chairman of the board of commissioners retains the discretion to recognize any person attending a meeting of the board. 
Editor's note— Sections 1.08.01 and 1.08.02 of the Rules of Procedure adopted 6-7-16 changed the public comment policy for meetings of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. The Rules of Procedure rescined Policy No. 03-P-01 which rescined Policy No. 99-P-1. 
Sec. 2-3. - Legal defense for county officials. 
The county will provide legal defense for all members of the boards and authorities listed in this section acting in their official and individual capacities. The provision of legal defense shall include indemnification for judgments, legal defenses and expenses incurred after the individual's term of office has expired if the action arises out of an incident occurring while the member held the office to which he was appointed. This section shall not cover actions where a member may be personally liable to one who sustains special damages as a result of any official act of such member if the act is done with the intent to violate the law and if a jury or other finder of fact specifically makes such finding and imposes liability accordingly. This section shall apply to members of the following: 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals of the county; 
(2)  The industrial development authority; 
(3)  The county airport authority; 
(4)  The board of commissioners of the county; and 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission. 
(Res. of 8-23-91; Res. of 10-8-91(1); Res. of 10-8-91(2); Res. of 10-8-91(3); Res. of 10-25-91) 
Sec. 2-3.1. - Legal defense for county employees. 
The county agrees to provide legal representation to all officers and employees in any civil suit directed against such officer or employee for acts or omissions arising out of the performance or while acting under color of office of said county. it will be a policy of the board of commissioners of the county to reimburse the officer or employee for any of the costs of any such judgment and the judgment itself, where the liability of the employee is based on facts other than his or her own wilful misconduct, occurring in the performance of his or her duty, while he or she is acting under color of office in this county. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, 9-26-97) 
Sec. 2-4. - Purchase orders and purchasing agent. 
(a)  Establishment of position of purchasing agent. The position of purchasing agent is hereby established for the county, which position shall be under the supervision of such officials as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies, equipment and services needed by any and all departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the county regardless of the source of funds. Agencies empowered by state statute to purchase independently may have the county purchasing agent appointed as their agent for the purposes upon relinquishing of such independence by the proper authority. 
(2)  The purchasing agent shall keep complete and detailed records of all purchases and disbursement, including purchase orders issued, quotations received, basis for bid award, and any and all documents required for audit of purchase activity. 
(3)  Purchases or contracts for goods and services shall not be executed by any officer or employee other than the purchasing agent, or upon his delegation. 
(c)  Purchasing procedure. 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall prepare or approve purchase order forms or request forms and all standards and written specifications fur supplies, equipment and services. All such specifications shall permit competition wherever practicable. 
(2)  All purchases shall be made in accordance with one of the following procedures, except as otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance of the common council: 
a.  Public construction contracts shall be bid in accordance with state statutes. 
b.  Purchases up to $250.00, may use a field purchase order or regular purchase order provided there is money in the budget to cover the cost. 
c.  Purchases from $251.00 to $2,499.00 shall be purchased provided there is money in the budget to cover the cost. There should be a verbal or written quotations of three prices attached to the requisition, when given to the purchasing department or finance department. A purchase order number must be given to the company when the items are ordered. This number must appear on the invoice for the proper payment. 
d.  Purchases of $2,500 to $4,999.00 shall be purchased provided there is money in the budget to cover the cost. Purchases must have the written approval from the county manager before purchasing or ordering item. You must have three written quotations attached to the requisition when given to the county manager. On approval he will send the requisition to purchasing for a purchase order number. They will call the department with the purchase order number so the items can be purchased by the department or the purchasing department will place the order. The purchase order number must be given to the company at the time of placing the order. This number must appear on the invoices for proper payment. 
e.  Formal sealed bids are required for all purchases over $5,000.00 including professional services. If items are included in the line budget approved by the board of commissioners, the county manager can approve the bid. If the items are not included in the approval line item budget, the board of commissioners must approve the purchase. After the bid is chosen, a copy of the bid is to be attached to the requisition when the order is placed. The purchase order number must be given to the company at the time. This number must appear on the invoice for proper payment. 
f.  No purchase order number needed for: medical expenses, utilities, travel advances, personal refunds, postage. 
g.  Invoices with no purchase order number. Invoices that come in with no purchase order appearing on the invoice will either be sent back to the company for them to obtain a number or the invoice will be given to the county manager. The county manager will then see what departments aren't completing the correct procedures for ordering items. 
(3)  The purchasing agent may reject any or all bids, or waive informalities in the bidding process. 
(4)  The purchasing agent may purchase from or in cooperation with other governmental agencies with or without competitive bids. 
(5)  The purchasing agent shall be responsible for developing and administering such other policies, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section or state statutes which he deems necessary for the efficient procurement of goods and services. A copy of such policies, rules and regulations shall be filed with the county clerk. 
(d)  Disposal of property. All agencies shall submit reports to the purchasing agent showing stocks or supplies, materials and equipment on hand and not in use, as requested. The purchasing agent shall be responsible for and have the authority for the disposal of obsolete, excess, unused or scrap materials, supplies and equipment. All revenues shall be deposited with the county finance director. 
(Ord. No. 94-1, § 1, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 96-10, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 99-O-2, 1-22-99) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-10, adopted April 9, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as replacing § 2-4(c)(2)b.—d. with 2-4(c)(2)b.—g., at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-5. - No smoking and tobacco-free policy within the county facilities. 
(a)  E-cigarette(s) means any electronic oral device, such as one consisting of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that produces an aerosol mist or vapor, the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term "vaping" shall mean the use of an e-cigarette or inhalation of the vaporized contents of an e-cigarette. 
(b)  There shall be no smoking of tobacco products, use of smokeless tobacco products, or vaping of e-cigarettes in county buildings, facilities, vehicles and lease space and equipment, except in those areas as designated by the board of commissioners. In addition, smoking and vaping are prohibited within 100 feet of any flammable substance and outdoor working including fueling stations, three-wall garages and storage areas. However, in other outdoor spaces where fuel and other flammable substances are contained in approved containers, smoking and vaping may be permitted. Smoking and vaping will be permitted in outside work areas which are not within 100 feet of any flammable or combustible substance. 
(Ord. No. 94-6, § 1, 3-25-94; Ord. No. 95-O-5, § 1, 2-24-95; Ord. No. 2015-O-002, § 1, 6-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-002, § 1, adopted June 16, 2015, changed the title of § 2-5 from "No smoking policy within the county facilities" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 2-6. - Food and drink in public areas of county justice center prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess open containers of food or drink or to consume food or drink in the public areas of the county justice center other than the designated canteen area. The public areas shall not include work areas of employees within the county justice center. However, it shall include the public hallways, courtrooms, deed record room, atrium area elevators, etc. 
Any persons in violation of this section shall be subject to citation by either the county sheriff's department or the county marshal returnable to the magistrate's court of the county. Any persons found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and/or imprisonment of 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-96; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 2-7. - Records management plan. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Cherokee County does hereby adopt the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et. seq.) and the rules and regulations established pursuant to said Act as a basis for establishing a county records management program. 
(b)  The Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia publication titled "Local Government Record Retention Schedules," as may be amended and updated from time to time by the Division of Archives and History of the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia, and an updated copy of which is on file with the Cherokee County Clerk, is hereby ratified and adopted as the Cherokee County record retention schedule. If the county maintains any records not addressed in this publication, the county shall submit a recommended retention schedule for such records to the Division of Archives and History for approval, and upon receiving approval, such retention schedule shall be incorporated into the Cherokee County Clerk's guidelines described in paragraph (e) below. 
(c)  No county record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a state records retention schedule approved by the Division of Archives and History of the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia. 
(d)  The Cherokee County Clerk is hereby appointed as the county's records management officer and is responsible for administering the county's records management program and will implement and supervise all components of this section. 
(e)  The Cherokee County Clerk shall prepare and maintain guidelines for maintenance and security of all county records covered by this section, and such guidelines shall, upon completion, become a part of this section. 
(f)  The county manager of Cherokee County is authorized to take all necessary action to ensure that the records of Cherokee County, Georgia, are preserved, protected, stored, and safeguarded in accord with pertinent statutes and rules and regulations, including but not limited to the aforementioned publication titled "Local Government Record Retention Schedules," O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 36-9-5. 
(Ord. No. 96-09, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-O-21, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2012-O-001, § 1, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 2018-O-002, § 1, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 2-8. - Standard for recovery of expenditures related to providing services. 
It is intended that this standard will provide a means for recovering cost of county resources used to respond to and/or provide extraordinary services for situations caused by a person, persons or a company. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  All departments within the county government are hereby authorized to take appropriate steps to generate an invoice for services when, in their judgment, it was necessary to render the services in the best interest of the citizens of the county. 
b.  Services provided by the county may be the result of carelessness, willful intent, negligence, or a failure to take actions that will eliminate reoccurring situations which impact on the county's cost of providing services and its ability to provide services for all citizens. 
c.  In lieu of monetary reimbursement, the party receiving the services may replace supplies and equipment expended by the county with equal or greater quantities. Any such material must be of equal or better specifications than that expended. This method of reimbursement must be preapproved by the department being reimbursed. 
d.  Invoices shall be submitted to the county manager and/or the county commission for approval prior to presenting the invoice to the party responsible for paying the reimbursement. 
e.  The cost used to calculate the invoice amounts shall be based on fair market values for the services, labor rates for county employees, advertised cost of goods and equipment, and actual cost. Compensation for overtime hours worked will be based on county policy. 
(2)  Preparing and submitting an invoice. 
a.  Department instructions, standard operating procedures, and instructions as published by the finance department of the county shall be followed when preparing invoices and obtaining approvals. 
b.  The finance department accounts receivable clerk shall be responsible for tracking the invoices and collecting the reimbursements. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
a.  Department heads shall be responsible for determining when invoicing for reimbursement is appropriate. 
b.  Failure to reimburse the county as specified by the invoice shall be processed in accordance with the procedures of the finance department's accounts receivable section. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, 8-22-97) 
Secs. 2-9—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - CHEROKEE COUNTY RECREATION AND PARKS ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-008, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, amended Art. II, Div. 1, to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 2-36—2-42, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-O-002, §§ 1—7, adopted June 19, 2007. 

Sec. 2-36. - Established. 
The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners (BOC) did hereby adopt an ordinance on the 19th day of June, 2007, establishing the Cherokee County Recreation and Parks Advisory Board (CCRP Advisory Board). 
The CCRP advisory board's principle responsibilities are: 
(1)  To advise in the initiation, planning, organization, implementation, and coordination of public recreation programs and activities for the county. 
(2)  To recommend a system of parks and facilities that will accommodate the public's need for recreation programs and activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-008, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 2-37. - Duties and scope. 
The duties and scope of the CCRP advisory board shall be advisory in nature, except as specifically authorized by the board of commissioners. 
Planning: 
(1)  Assist and advise regarding "vision" for future parks, programs, partnerships, etc. 
(2)  Assist and advise in determining direction and priorities for programs and utilization of resources. This could/would include, but is not limited to, impact and consideration of budgets and organizational structure, human resource allocation, etc. 
(3)  Assist and advise regarding evolution of future green space and passive recreation sites, scope, and priorities. 
Programs: 
(4)  To assist in establishing and/or reviewing guidelines, rules and regulations by which parks and recreation programs may operate. 
(5)  To Approve fees and charges for use of facilities and participation in programs. 
(6)  To review staff recommendations of contracts for provision of programs and services. 
Facilities: 
(7)  To ensure at all times safety and security of site locations and physical facility standards. 
(8)  To review new park and any major renovation concept design draft and submit recommendations to BOC to include in final concept design approval. 
(9)  When requested by BOC, participate in contract bid review process. 
Other: 
(10)  To be the reference point for adjudication of complaints, disputes or other grievances from the public arising out of parks and recreation activities. If remain unresolved, these issues will pass to the BOC, as appropriate. 
(11)  To submit annual report to BOC citing key issues resolved, program accomplishments, program effectiveness, etc. 
(12)  To perform other duties and responsibilities as may be conferred by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-008, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 2-38. - Membership. 
The CCRP advisory board shall be representative of the community and shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the county and who shall serve with compensation, as determined by the BOC. Each member of the BOC shall have one appointee. 
Meetings: 
(a)  Meetings of the CCRP advisory board shall be on a bimonthly basis unless when determined otherwise by the CCRP advisory board. The chairperson of the CCRP advisory board, or in his absence, the vice-chair, may call a special meeting of the CCRP advisory board at any time by giving each member 24 hours notice. Notice of meetings and agendas must be posted on the Cherokee Recreation and Parks Agency web site, as soon as possible but at least 24 hours before the date and time set for the meeting. 
(b)  Special called meetings will be scheduled upon request by three or more members. A quorum of the CCRP advisory board shall be in attendance before action of an official nature can be taken. A quorum is three of the appointed members. All meetings of the CCRP advisory board shall be subject to the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(c)  Attendance of members. An appointed member who misses more than three consecutive meetings loses his status as a member of the CCRP advisory board until reappointed or replaced by the respective appointing member of the BOC. Absences due to sickness or other emergencies of like nature, shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the CCRP advisory board, except that in the event of a long illness, or other such cause for prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. 
(d)  Election of officers. The CCRP advisory board shall elect from its membership a chairperson and other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis and may be reelected for succeeding terms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-008, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 2-39. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of the members of the CCRP advisory board shall run concurrently with the term of the member of the board of commissioners who appointed that particular member. In any event, term shall not exceed four years in the absence of reappointment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-008, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 2-40—2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHEROKEE CLEAN COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

Sec. 2-56. - Establishment. 
For the purpose of assisting the county and the board of commissioners in establishing, promoting and maintaining a countywide policy for improved environmental and waste management, a commission is hereby created, to be known as the Cherokee Clean Commission. The commission shall have only advisory authority in recommending waste and environmental management policies, with the goal that all refuse and clean community activities may follow a common purpose. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-57. - Membership; appointment of members; initial terms. 
(a)  The commission established by this division shall consist of 15 members appointed by the board of commissioners, serving without remuneration, who represent the areas of business and industry, communications, community and civic organizations, municipalities and educational institutions. The qualifications, method of selection, procedure for removal and method of filling vacancies shall be provided by resolution of the board of commissioners and the current chairman of Cherokee Clean and Beautiful. 
(b)  In order to achieve continuity of actions and procedures, the initial appointments shall be as follows: seven members for a period of one year and eight members for a period of two years. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 2-58. - Organization; meetings. 
The commission established by this division shall hold an organizational meeting to select from its membership a chairman, a secretary and other such officers as may be desired before proceeding to any other matters of business. The commission shall also designate the time and place of all future meetings, to be held at regular intervals. A quorum shall consist of eight members. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 5) 
Sec. 2-59. - Rules of procedure; minutes. 
The commission established by this division shall adopt its own bylaws and rules of procedure. The secretary of the commission shall take minutes of all meetings of the commission and keep records of all regularly scheduled meetings and other pertinent actions or proceedings. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 6) 
Sec. 2-60. - Duties. 
The responsibilities of the commission established by this division shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  To determine and recommend program priorities on a countywide basis; 
(2)  To review current ordinances and propose to the board of commissioners any changes or additional ordinances felt to be necessary in order to achieve the goals of the commission, with particular emphasis placed on more stringent enforcement; 
(3)  To monitor performance from data collected and examined under the Keep America Beautiful, Inc., Clean Community System guidelines and make an annual report to the board of commissioners; 
(4)  To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate communitywide efforts to achieve its goals; 
(5)  To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objectives; and 
(6)  To carry out such tasks as the board of commissioners may designate. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 4) 
Sec. 2-61. - Expenditure of county funds. 
The commission established by this division shall not have the power to financially obligate the county without prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 7) 
Sec. 2-62. - Annual report; financial records. 
The commission established by this division shall annually provide the board of commissioners a report of its actions and proceedings in connection with each project or undertaking, and shall include as part of its report a statement of its receipts and disbursements, from whatever source and to whatever object, for the preceding 12 months. The commission records shall be kept in a manner that will enable it to make such reports and accountings, and they shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 8) 
Sec. 2-63. - Authority of board of commissioners to terminate projects. 
Any project or undertaking begun by the commission established by this division shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the board of commissioners that the continuation thereof is not in the best interests of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-87(2), § 9) 
Secs. 2-64—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUSPENSION OF CODE DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 2-71. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-18, § 1, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 2-72. - Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. Fees shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-18, § 2, 7-13-99) 
Secs. 2-73—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENGLISH LANGUAGE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 2-81. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cherokee County English Language Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 1, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 2-82. - Findings and declaration of purpose. 
The people of Cherokee County find and declare: 
(1)  That the English language is the common language of Cherokee County, of the State of Georgia and of the United States. 
(2)  That the use of a common language removes barriers of misunderstanding and helps to unify the people of Cherokee County, the State of Georgia, and the United States, and helps to enable the full economic and civic participation of all its citizens, regardless of national origin, creed, race or other characteristics, and thus a compelling governmental interest exists in promoting, preserving, and strengthening the use of the English language. 
(3)  That proficiency in the English language, as well as in languages other than the English language, benefits the county both economically and culturally and should be encouraged. 
(4)  That, in addition to any other ways to promote proficiency in the English language, the government of Cherokee County can promote proficiency in English by using the English language in its official actions and activities. 
(5)  That in today's modern society, Cherokee County may also need to protect and preserve the rights of those who speak only the English language to use or obtain governmental programs and benefits. 
(6)  That the government of the county can reduce costs and promote efficiency in its roles as employer and as a government of the people, by using the English language in its official actions and activities. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 2, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 2-83. - Official English declaration. 
(a)  The English language is the official language of Cherokee County. 
(b)  The county board of commissioners shall take all steps necessary to insure that the role of English as the common language of Cherokee County is preserved and enhanced. 
(c)  The government of the county shall make no policy that diminishes or ignores the role of English as the common language of the county. 
(d)  Official actions of the county that bind or commit the county or that give the appearance of presenting the official views or position of the county shall be taken in the English language, and in no other language. Unofficial or nonbinding translations or explanations of official actions may be provided separately in languages other than English, if they are appropriately labeled as such and reference is made to a method to obtain the official action; unless otherwise required by federal law or the law of the State of Georgia, no person has a right to such an unofficial or nonbinding translation or explanation, and no liability or commitment of the county shall be based on such a translation or explanation. 
(e)  No ordinance, decree, program, or policy of the county or any of its departments, offices or agencies shall require the use of any language other than English for any documents, regulations, orders, transactions, proceedings, meetings, programs, or publications, except as provided in section 2-84. 
(f)  A person who speaks only the English language shall not be deemed ineligible to participate in any programs, benefits and opportunities, including employment, solely because the person speaks only the English language, except when required to speak another language as provided in section 2-84. 
(g)  No law, ordinance, decree, program, or policy of the county or any of its departments, offices or agencies shall penalize or impair the rights, obligations or opportunities available to any person solely because a person speaks only the English language. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 3, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 2-84. - Exceptions. 
Cherokee County and its departments, offices or agencies may use a language other than English for any of the following purposes, whether or not the use would be considered part of an official action: 
(1)  To teach or encourage the learning of languages other than English. 
(2)  To protect the public health or safety. 
(3)  To teach English to those who are not fluent in the language. 
(4)  To comply with the Native American Languages Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the Voting Rights Act, or any other federal law or law of the State of Georgia. 
(5)  To protect the rights of criminal defendants and victims of crime. 
(6)  To promote trade, commerce, and tourism. 
(7)  To create or promote mottos or designations, inscribe public monuments, and perform other acts involving the customary use of a language other than English. 
(8)  To utilize terms of art or terms or phrases from other languages which are commonly used in communications otherwise in English. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 4, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 2-85. - Private use protected. 
The declaration and use of English as the official language of the county should not be construed as infringing upon the rights of any person to use a language other than English in private communications or actions, including the right of government officials (including elected officials) to communicate with others while not performing official actions of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 5, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 2-86. - Interpretation. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as conflicting with the statutes of the United States, or the laws of the State of Georgia. Any previous ordinances or resolutions of the county relating to this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004, § 6, 12-5-06) 
Secs. 2-87—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCUREMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 19, 2016, repealed former art. V, §§ 2-101—2-104, 2-111—2-113, 2-121—2-133, 2-141—2-147, 2-161—2-163, 2-171—2-175, 2-181—2-184, 2-191—2-194, and 2-201—2-205, and enacted a new art. V, §§ 2-101—2-104, 2-111-2-113, 2-121—2-134, 2-141—2-148, 2-161—2-163, 2-171—2-175, 2-181—2-184, 2-191—2-194, and 2-201—2-206. Former art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted August 2, 2011. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 2-101. - Purpose/repeal provisions. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all businesses involved in public purchasing by the county, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(b)  Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, including but not limited to section 2-4 of the Code of Ordinances, shall be, and the same are, hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-1.01) 
Sec. 2-102. - Application, definitions. 
(a)  This article applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services and construction entered into by the county after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by the county for public purchasing from businesses, irrespective of the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal or state assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal or state laws and regulations. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Adequate evidence means information sufficient to support the reasonable belief that a particular act or omission occurred. 
Architectural-engineering services means those professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering or other such professional services, as defined by the laws of the state. 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet county requirements, and which specification provides for the submission of equivalent or fungible products. 
Brand name specifications mean a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, or any other private legal commercial entity. 
Change order means a written order signed and issued by the purchasing agent, directing the contractor to make changes in the scope of work of the contract and typically involving a price modification. 
Confidential information means any information that is available to an employee solely because of the employee's status as an employee of the county and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
Conflict of interest means any situation resulting in a violation of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14. 
Construction (public works) means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any real property other than those projects covered by Chapter 4, Article 3, Part 2 of Title 32 of the O.C.G.A. Such term does not include the routine operation, repair or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property or any energy saving performance contract or any improvements or installations performed as part of an energy savings contract. See O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(12). 
Contract means all types of county agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of supplies, services and/or construction. 
Contractor means any person having a contract with the county or an agency thereof. 
Cost analysis means the evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed. 
Cost data means factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead and other cost elements that are expected to be incurred or that have been actually incurred by the contractor performing the contract. 
Cost reimbursement contract means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this article, and a fee or profit, if any. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wages from the county, whether elected or not, but does not include independent contractors, members of the county board of commissioners, or the county manager. 
Fair and reasonable in relation to price determinations, shall refer to an assessment by the county that an offeror's proposed price for supplies or services can be considered "fair and reasonable" on the basis of applying one or more price analysis techniques. Generally, the term refers to the price that a prudent businessperson would pay for particular goods or services under competitive market conditions, given a reasonable knowledge of the marketplace. 
Gratuity means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, or deposit of money, service or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received in return. 
Immediate family means an individual's spouse, children, parents, and siblings. 
Invitation for bids means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
Lowest proposed price means the lowest bid price of all offerors, or if the lowest proposed price was not from a Cherokee County-based business (as that term is defined in section 2-121(1)d, any Cherokee County-based business with a bid price within five percent of the lowest bid price from an offeror deemed by the purchasing agent to be responsive and responsible, if such Cherokee County-based business agrees to reduce its bid price to match such lowest bid price. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled other than an electric personal assistive mobility device, as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(33). 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, company, proprietorship, professional corporation, or any other legal entity. 
Price analysis means the evaluation of pricing data, without analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which evaluation may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
Pricing data means factual information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured. "Prices" in this definition refers to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices, and current selling prices. The term "pricing data" refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices. 
Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
Procurement summary means a form that has been approved by the county manager that adequately summarizes the important aspects of procurement actions greater than $25,000.00 and as defined herein as well as when deemed appropriate by the purchasing agent. This form shall address, at a minimum, the value of the action, if the action was an "Emergency Procurement" pursuant to section 2-128 below, the scoring of proposals, the evaluated pricing proposal totals from responsive and responsible bidders (including the number of updates quoted by each bidder), the rationale for determining the selected supplier and a determination of how (or if) the pricing was determined to be fair and reasonable. 
Professional services means the professional services rendered by attorneys at law and any type of professional service that may be legally performed only pursuant to a license from a board pursuant to Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., for example, the personal services rendered by certified public accountants, chiropractors, dentists, osteopaths, physicians and surgeons, and podiatrists (chiropodists) as described in O.C.G.A. § 14-10-2(2) or real estate services provided by a licensed real estate broker as described in Chapter 37, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Qualified products list means an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers that, prior to competitive solicitation, the county has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
Responsible bidder or offeror means a person or entity that has the capability in all respects to perform fully and reliably the contract requirements. 
Responsive bidder or offeror means a person or entity that has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end tangible product other than reports that are merely incidental to the required performance, including, without limitation, a professional or consulting service. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
Significant financial interest means anything of monetary value, including, but not limited to, salary or other payments for services (e.g., consulting fees); equity interests (e.g., stocks, stock options or other ownership interest); and intellectual property rights (e.g., patents, trademarks, copyrights and royalties from such rights). The term does not include: 
— Salary, royalties or other remuneration from Cherokee County; or 
— Income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored or approved by the county. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
Subcontractor means any person with whom a contractor contracts with or intends to contract with for the performance of services on any contract with the county or any agency thereof. 
Supplies means all personal property, including but not limited to equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding a permanent interest in land. 
Using agency means any department, commission, board or public agency of the county requiring supplies, services and/or construction procured pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-1.02; Ord. No. 2018-O-005, § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 2-103. - Public access to procurement information. 
Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent required by law and shall be available to the public upon written request. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-1.03) 
Sec. 2-104. - E-verification. 
E-Verification. All contracts for the "physical performance of services," as defined in O.C.G.A. § 13-10-90(4), shall be procured and administered in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 13-10-91. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-1.04) 
Secs. 2-105—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICE OF PURCHASING AGENT 

Sec. 2-111. - Establishment, appointment. 
(a)  Establishment of the position of director of procurement (purchasing agent). There is hereby created the position of director of procurement, who shall be the county's principal public purchasing official and agent ("Purchasing Agent"). 
(b)  Appointment. The director of procurement shall be appointed by the administrative services agency director of Cherokee County and confirmed by the county manager. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-2.01; Ord. No. 2017-O-003, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 2-112. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  Principal public purchasing official. Except as otherwise provided herein, the purchasing agent shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for the county and shall be responsible for the procurement of supplies, services, and/or construction, as well as the management and disposal of supplies, in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this article and subject to the supervision of the administrative services agency director, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Purchase all supplies, equipment and services needed by any and all departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the county regardless of the source of funds. Agencies empowered by state statute to purchase independently may have the purchasing agent appointed as their agent for these purposes upon relinquishing of such independence by the proper authority. 
(2)  Keep complete and detailed records of all purchases and disbursements, including purchase orders issued, quotations received, basis for bid awards, and any and all documents required for audit of purchase activity. 
(3)  Ensure that purchases or contracts for goods and services shall be reviewed the purchasing agent. 
(4)  Have the discretion to reject any or all bids, or waive informalities in the bidding process. 
(5)  Have the discretion to purchase from or in cooperation with other governmental agencies with or without competitive bids to the extent allowed by law. 
(6)  Be responsible for developing and administering such other policies, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this section or state statutes, that he or she deems necessary for the efficient procurement of goods and services. A copy of such policies, rules and regulations shall be filed with the county clerk. 
(7)  Have the discretion in determining whether an offer, bid, quotation or proposal is from a "responsible bidder or offeror", a "responsible" business or is a "responsible" offer, bid, quotation or proposal, by evaluating factors that may include, but are not limited to: a) the past contracting history, performance and experience with the county or any county authority, county office or county agency of the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person; b) whether that prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, is currently on the state's suspended or debarred suppliers list, the federal government's list of any debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors and/or or any list of suspended, debarred or ineligible contractors maintained by another governmental entity including any other local government; and/or c) whether the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, has sufficient experience, financial ability or credit, judgment, reliability, integrity, trustworthiness, facilities, equipment, perseverance and skill which will assure good faith performance. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-2.02; Ord. No. 2017-O-003, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 2-113. - Delegations to other county officials. 
The purchasing agent may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services or construction items to other county officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-2.03) 
Secs. 2-114—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOURCE SELECTION 

Sec. 2-121. - Cherokee County-based preference. 
In addition to the state purchasing preferences mandated by O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1, Cherokee County-based businesses may be awarded a contract as the lowest responsive and responsible bidder under the circumstances specified herein. This section 2-121 shall only be applicable: 1) to purchases funded exclusively by county funds; and 2) regarding purchases funded in whole or in part by funds other than county funds, where the applicable funding regulations authorize the use of the local preference provisions of this section. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  Good faith effort means those demonstrable activities supported by documentation and results that verify the bidder's attempts to reach the established goal. 
b.  Implementing department means the county department or agency that has responsibility for oversight of a contract. 
c.  Joint venture means cooperation between two or more corporate bodies for a particular project in which they share the responsibilities and profits associated with the project. 
d.  Cherokee County-based business means a business with a physical and economic relationship to Cherokee County as evidenced by a building or office physically located in the county and the payment of (1) Cherokee County Occupational Taxes (business license), and (2) county property taxes on a plant or office and equipment such as is ordinarily required for the performance of the contract bid. 
e.  Subcontractor means a person or company that assumes, by secondary contract, some or all of the obligations of an original contractor. 
(f)  Construction. For the purposes of this division, the term "Construction" shall exclude public works construction purchases of $100,000.00 or more and road construction purchases, as discussed in subsection (4) below. 
(2)  Preference for Cherokee County-based businesses on contracts over $25,000.00 when sealed bids (pursuant to § 2-122 competitive sealed bidding of this article) are received for architectural, engineering, purchases, supplies and construction contracts greater than $25,000.00, the following shall apply: 
a.  The person or business submitting the lowest bid that has been deemed responsive and responsible shall be deemed the lowest qualified bidder. If, however, the lowest qualified bidder is not a Cherokee County-based business, any Cherokee County-based business with a bid within five percent of the lowest dollar bid that has been deemed responsive and responsible in all respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids/proposals shall be deemed the lowest qualified bidder if it agrees to reduce its bid price to match the bid price of the lowest price bidder. The percentage difference may be revised from time to time as the board of commissioners deems appropriate. 
b.  If a Cherokee County-based business that has been deemed responsive and responsible refuses to reduce its price bid to match the lowest price bidder, then the next lowest responsible Cherokee County-based business with a bid within the established percentage of the lowest bid shall be given the opportunity to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder. If the Cherokee County-based bidder deemed responsive and responsible agrees to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest non-Cherokee County bidder, it will be deemed the lowest bidder and awarded the bid. 
c.  If no responsive and responsible Cherokee County-based business within the established percentage of the lowest bid agrees to reduce its bid to that of the lowest bidder, then the contract shall be awarded to the person or business with the lowest, most responsive and responsible bid. 
d.  No contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet in any manner that permits 50 percent or more of the dollar value of the contract to be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not meet the definition of Cherokee County-based business. 
e.  Any Cherokee County-based business awarded a contract pursuant to this section shall agree to make available to the county all records necessary to establish its eligibility and compliance with all county, state and local laws. 
(3)  Affirmative measures for enhancing Cherokee-based businesses. The county may allow for joint ventures or other documented business arrangements to enable Cherokee County-based businesses to meet bonding requirements for contracts greater than $100,000.00. 
(4)  Construction. Public works construction purchases of $100,000.00 or more shall be made in compliance with Title 36, Chapter 91 of the O.C.G.A. and shall not be subject to this section. Road construction purchases shall be made in compliance with Title 32, Chapter 4, Article 3, Part 2 of the O.C.G.A. and shall not be subject to this section. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.01) 
Sec. 2-122. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All contracts of the county shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except as otherwise provided in this article, or as provided by general law. 
(b)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued for the procurement of each contract and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable for the procurement. 
(c)  Public notice. For all purchases exceeding $25,000.00, except as otherwise provided in this article, advertisements for formal sealed bids shall be first be posted on the county website for two consecutive weeks prior to the week of bid opening as well as posted on the Georgia Procurement Registry pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-80-26. Regular bid openings shall be conducted by the Purchasing Agent or his/her designee at the offices of the purchasing department or other designated location. Immediately after opening all bids, the purchasing agent or his/her designee shall record and certify each and every bid. The date, time and place of bid opening shall be included in the specifications or invitations to bid and in the published advertisement therefore. 
(d)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids in the county's possession may be withdrawn: 1) prior to official opening; or 2) prior to award, upon approval of the county manager or the purchasing agent, where errors are identified, provided that such request is made in writing from an appropriately authorized agent of the bidder. Bids shall be evaluated, except as otherwise provided in this article, based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(e)  Award. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids; provided, however, that if the bid from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder exceeds the funds budgeted for the contract, the county may negotiate with such apparent low bidder to obtain a contact price within the budgeted amount. Such negotiations may include changes in the scope of work and other bid requirements. In the event that two or more bids are determined to be identical in price or otherwise of clearly equal merit, the county manager shall determine which of such bids shall be selected. 
(f)  Acceptance of low bid not required. The award of a contract to a prospective contractor or person based on lowest evaluated bid price alone can be a false economy if there is subsequent default, late deliveries, or other unsatisfactory performance resulting in additional contractual or administrative costs. While it is important that county purchases and contracts be made at the lowest possible bid price, this does not require an award to a prospective contractor or person solely because that prospective contractor or person submits the lowest bid. A prospective contractor or person must affirmatively demonstrate his, her or its responsibility. In evaluating the responsibility of a prospective contractor or person submitting a bid or whether the bid has been submitted by the "lowest responsible and responsive bidder," the purchasing agent or his/her designee shall have the discretion to evaluate factors that may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The past contracting history, performance and experience with the county or any county authority, county office or county agency of the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person; 
(2)  Whether that prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, is currently on the state's suspended or debarred suppliers list, the federal government's list of any debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors and/or any list of suspended, debarred or ineligible contractors maintained by another governmental entity including any other local government; and 
(3)  Whether the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, has sufficient experience, financial ability or credit, judgment, reliability, integrity, trustworthiness, facilities, equipment, perseverance and skill which will assure good faith performance. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.02; Ord. No. 2018-O-005, § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 2-123. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the purchasing agent determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the county, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 2-122(c). 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. To the extent allowed by law, no proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the contents of any proposals to competing offerors received in response to a solicitation or during the process of negotiation. The purchasing agent may request from bidders such clarifications and/or minor modifications regarding their proposals as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article. Subsequent to award, a proposal summary, which shall include a register of proposals, shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection, except as otherwise allowed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(10). 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. The purchasing agent or county manager shall preapprove any bid that considers the relative importance of price in the source selection process to be less than 50 percent. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. Discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be provided equal opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining updated offers. 
(g)  [Rescoring offers.] Once updated offers have been obtained from all offerors reasonably susceptible of being selected for award, they shall be rescored. The updated scores shall result in a determination as to which suppliers are considered responsive and responsible and qualified to perform the work and a ranking shall be prepared in order of qualifications based upon the scoring values. 
(h)  [Evaluation of top ranked offerors.] The top ranked offeror's price(s) for goods and/or services shall be evaluated by the purchasing agent or county manager as to the fairness and reasonableness of the proposed price and regarding the value provided to the county. If such evaluation reveals that the pricing of the highest ranked offeror is not fair and reasonable, the purchasing agent shall initiate negotiations with the top ranked offeror. Should these negotiations fail to result in an acceptable price for the county, the purchasing agent shall formally terminate these negotiations. Should the second and third highest ranked offerors be considered qualified and acceptable, then the purchasing agent shall make a determination regarding their price reasonableness and negotiate as necessary with one supplier at a time in the ranked order until either an acceptable price is obtained or negotiations are formally terminated. The availability of an approved budget adequate to cover the price of any of the acceptable offeror's prices is not an indication of a fair and reasonable price. For the purposes of this article, a determination of a "fair and reasonable" price shall occur before the purchasing agent may award contracts or place orders, with any exceptions to this requirement to be approved by the county manager or board of commissioners. 
(i)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the county. This determination shall take into consideration both the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals and the determination that the contracted price is fair and reasonable. 
(j)  Acceptance of low proposal not required. The award of a contract to a prospective contractor, person or entity based on lowest evaluated proposal price alone can be a false economy if there is subsequent default, late deliveries, or other unsatisfactory performance resulting in additional contractual or administrative costs. While it is important that county purchases and contracts be made at the lowest possible purchase price, this does not require an award to a prospective contractor, person or entity solely because that prospective contractor, person or entity submits the lowest proposal. A prospective contractor, person or entity must affirmatively demonstrate his, her or its responsibility. In evaluating the responsibility of a prospective contractor, person or entity submitting a proposal or whether the proposal has been submitted by the "lowest responsible and responsive bidder," the purchasing agent or his/her designee shall have the discretion to evaluate factors that may include, but are not limited to: 1) the past contracting history, performance and experience with the county or any county authority, county office or county agency of the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person; 2) whether that prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, is currently on the state's suspended or debarred suppliers list, the federal government's list of any debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors and/or any list of suspended, debarred or ineligible contractors maintained by another governmental entity including any other local government; and/or 3) whether the prospective contractor or person, or any identified subcontractor of the prospective contractor or person, has sufficient experience, financial ability or credit, judgment, reliability, integrity, trustworthiness, facilities, equipment, perseverance and skill which will assure good faith performance. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.03) 
Sec. 2-124. - Contracting for designated professional services. 
(a)  Applicability. Regarding the provision of professional services costing less than or equal to $25,000.00, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations, and award shall be made to the responsible business offering the lowest quotation conforming to the standards of this article. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. Professional services costing $25,000.00 or more shall conform to the procedure set forth in subsections (b) through (e) below. 
(b)  Public announcement and form of request for proposals. When seeking proposals for professional services, adequate notice of the need for such services shall be given through a request for proposals posted on the county website, and those professional services vendors registered with the county to receive such notices shall be notified by email upon the posting of any such notice. The request for proposals shall describe the services required, list the types of information and data required of each offeror, and state the relative importance of particular qualifications. 
(c)  Statement of qualifications. When seeking proposals for professional services, the purchasing agent shall develop a uniform format for statements of qualifications to be made a part of the proposal. Businesses engaged in providing professional services may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional services. Businesses may amend these statements at any time by filing a new statement. 
(d)  Discussions. The head of a using department procuring the professional services or a designee of such officer may conduct discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors, to the extent allowed by law. 
(e)  Award. Award shall be made to the offeror determined by the board of commissioners or its designee to be best qualified, based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and where the negotiated compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more other offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted with such other offeror or offerors, in the order of the respective qualification ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best qualified if the negotiated amount of compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.04) 
Sec. 2-125. - Purchases exceeding $25,000.00. 
(a)  The following policy and procedures with respect to certain purchases exceeding $25,000.00 shall be construed and interpreted as, and have the effect of, the exercise of the authority of the board of commissioners to make these specific purchases. 
(b)  The adoption of the budget containing line item expenditures for purchases normally made through the county purchasing department shall be approved by the board of commissioners for the purchase of those line items by the purchasing department without further action of the board of commissioners, subject to and upon compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The items to be purchased must be items included as line items in the approved budget. 
(2)  There must be full compliance with all requirements of this article with regard to advertisement and bidding prior to any such purchase. 
(3)  The purchase must be within the budgeted amount which has been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  The purchase must be made from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder or the proposer determined to have submitted the proposal in the best interest of the county. 
(c)  The procedure outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to purchases which are not normally made through the county purchasing department, nor shall it affect the county manager's authority to make purchases under or equal to $25,000.00. 
(d)  The procedure outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or supersede the county's policy for the procurement of professional services in section 2-124. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.05) 
Sec. 2-126. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General. Any contract not exceeding $25,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
(b)  Small purchases. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases, in excess of $5,000.00 but less than or equal to $25,000.00, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations, and public notice may be accomplished in accordance with § 2-123(c). Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(c)  Small purchases of $5,000.00 or less. The county manager, or designee, shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of $5,000.00 or less. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.06) 
Sec. 2-127. - Sole source of procurement. 
(a)  Generally. A contract may be awarded without competition when the purchasing agent determines, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction item. The purchasing agent shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. The purchasing agent shall maintain a list of sole source procurements by each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the items procured under each contract, and the identification number of each contract file. Public works construction contracts shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 91, and road construction contracts shall be governed by O.C.G.A. Title 32, Chapter 4, Article 3, Part 2. 
(b)  State contracts for procurement. Where the state takes bids on certain items and it is determined that the purchase of these items is to the best advantage of the county, then it shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to use such bids. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.07) 
Sec. 2-128. - Emergency procurements. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the purchasing agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies and/or services when there exists a threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public or county employees; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be documented in the procurement summary. Public works construction contracts shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 91 and tit. 13, ch. 10, and road construction contracts shall be governed by O.C.G.A. tit. 32, ch. 4, art. 3, pt. 2. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.08; Ord. No. 2018-O-005, § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 2-129. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the county. The reasons therefore shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the county shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part when in the best interests of the county. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any re-solicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.09) 
Sec. 2-130. - Cost or pricing data. 
(a)  Required submissions relating to the award of contracts. A prospective contractor shall submit cost or pricing data, when requested by the purchasing agent, and where the contract is expected to exceed $100,000.00 and awarded by competitive sealed proposals or by sole source procurement authority. 
(b)  Required submissions relating to change orders. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the pricing of any change order, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing data was required in connection with the initial pricing of the contract, when the change order involves aggregate increases or aggregate decreases in costs plus applicable profits that are expected to exceed $25,000.00, unless included in county controlled contingency approved by the board of commissioners. In such event, the county manager at his/her discretion, may elect to re-bid the contract. 
(c)  Certification required. A contractor, actual or prospective, required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section, shall conform to the general format and instructions as contained in Federal Acquisition Regulation Subpart 15.4, Table 15-2 and certify that, to the best of its knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted was accurate, complete and current as of the date(s) executed prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the change order. Other formats for the submission of cost data may be approved by the purchasing agent. 
(d)  Price adjustment provision required. Any contract award or change order under which the submission and certification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain provisions stating that the price to the county, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any significant sums by which the county finds that such price was increased because the contractor-furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete or not current as of the date agreed upon between the county and the contractor. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.10; Ord. No. 2017-O-003, § 1, 4-4-17; Ord. No. 2018-O-005, § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 2-131. - Bid and performance bonds on supply or service contracts. 
Bid and performance bonds or other security may be requested for supply contracts or service contracts as the purchasing agent or head of a using agency deems advisable to protect the county's interests. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid or performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder's or offeror's responsibility. Any such bond shall be: 
(1)  On the bond form provided by the county; 
(2)  Properly executed by the contractor and surety; and 
(3)  Issued by a surety company determined to be: 
a.  In good standing with the office of the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner; and 
b.  Listed in U.S. Treasury Department Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on federal bonds. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.11) 
Sec. 2-132. - Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE). 
The board of commissioners has established a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program in accordance with regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), 49 CFR Part 26. The county has received federal financial assistance from the Georgia Department of Transportation, and as a condition of receiving this assistance, the county has signed an assurance that it will comply with 49 CFR Part 26. 
It is the policy of Cherokee County to ensure that DBEs, as defined in 49 CFR Part 26, have an equal opportunity to receive and participate in DOT-assisted contracts. It is also the county's policy: 
(1)  To ensure nondiscrimination in the award and administration of DOT-assisted contracts; 
(2)  To create a level playing field on which DBEs can compete fairly for DOT-assisted contracts; 
(3)  To ensure that the DBE program is narrowly tailored in accordance with applicable law; 
(4)  To ensure that only firms that fully meet 49 CFR Part 26 eligibility standards are permitted to participate as DBEs; 
(5)  To help remove barriers to the participation of DBEs in DOT assisted contracts; 
(6)  To assist the development of firms that can compete successfully in the market place outside the DBE program. 
The public works agency director, or designee as confirmed by the county manager, is designated as the DBE officer of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.12) 
Sec. 2-133. - Procurement of green products and technologies 
(a)  Preference for purchase of recycled paper. The purchasing agent shall establish and maintain procedures and specifications for the purchase of paper and paper products which give preference, whenever feasible, to the purchase of recycled paper, and paper products containing recycled paper. Products that do not meet the definition of 50 percent recycled material content, but do contain some percentage of recycled material, shall be preferred over virgin materials. 
The purchasing agent and department heads, under the oversight of the purchasing agent, may purchase recycled paper and paper products, instead of unrecycled paper or paper products, whenever such recycled paper and paper products are available at a comparable cost to unrecycled paper and paper products, and when fitness and quality are similar. 
(b)  Preference for ENERGY STAR qualified products. The purchasing agent and department heads, under the oversight of the purchasing agent, shall select, where life-cycle and cost-effective, ENERGY STAR and other energy efficient products, when acquiring energy-using products. This information will be required by the bidder in their bid submittal. 
(c)  Preference for high efficiency plumbing fixtures in county facilities. All new county buildings should have high efficiency plumbing fixtures that meet the following standards: toilets (1.28 gpf or less), urinals (0.5 gpf or less) and faucets (1.5 gpm or less). This information will be required by the bidder in their bid submittal. 
(d)  It is the goal of the county to integrate green and/or sustainable building principles and practices into the design, construction, and operations of all county facilities to the fullest extent possible in which the total project square footage includes 5,000 gross square feet of occupied space or the total project cost exceeds $2,000,000.00. 
(e)  The LEED TM rating system and reference guide shall be used as guidance for design and a measuring tool to determine what constitutes sustainable building by national standards. 
(f)  LED traffic signals. It is the policy of the county that all traffic signals be equipped with LED bulbs meeting Institution of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and Department of Energy (DOE) standards. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.13) 
Sec. 2-134. - Motor vehicle purchases. 
(a)  Regarding the procurement of motor vehicles other than as provided in subsections (b) through (f) below, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations, and public notice shall be accomplished in accordance with § 2-122(c). Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(b)  Purchases of state vehicles, as defined below from manufacturers operating nationwide dealership networks and meeting all of the criteria of subsections (b) through (f) may be accomplished notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a) above: 
(1)  For purposes of subsections (b) through (f), the term "State Vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle identified in a competitive bid process by the state or any of its departments, agencies, or other governmental entities and regarding which a contract is awarded by such state entity. 
(2)  The state vehicle is either a standard model sold to the general public or a model specifically modified for law enforcement or fire safety purposes; examples of the latter category include, but are not limited to: heavy duty suspension, increased horsepower, and a modified dash board. 
(3)  The state vehicle options specified shall be standard manufacturer options as would typically be defined on the manufacture's official web site or as managed and maintained by the manufacturer on a national or regional basis for government specific applications. Examples of standard manufacturer options include, but are not limited to, power steering, electronic windows, colors, engine size, and trim packages, to include law enforcement or fire safety special service packages. Examples of non-standard manufacturer options include, but are not limited to the addition of agency specific decals, emergency lighting equipment and/or electronics and other similar aftermarket conversions. 
(4)  The state vehicle manufacturer's dealer network can provide price quotes for and take orders for the state vehicle. 
(c)  The agency or department requesting such a state vehicle shall specify the make, model and all required manufacturer options. The defined product would include make, model, trim and all required manufacturer options (by way of example: Ford F-150, XLT, Ingot Silver, SuperCab with 8 Foot Box, 3.7L V6 FFVEM, 3.55 Non-Limited Slip Axle Ratio, Equipment Group 300A, P235/75R17 BSW All-Terrain Tires). 
(d)  Written competitive bids with the exact state vehicle specifications shall be obtained as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of three written bids shall be required where the total vehicle purchase will equal or exceed $100,000.00. 
(2)  For purchases less than $100,000.00, while reasonable attempts should be made to procure three written bids, a minimum of two bids shall be acceptable where bids are requested from at least five dealers. 
(3)  At least one of the minimum number of required bids must be obtained from a dealer holding a contract for the state vehicle with a state entity. 
(4)  The successful bidder shall agree in writing to the county's standard purchase order terms and conditions. 
(e)  A written procurement summary, on a form prepared by the purchasing agent, will be used to document each state vehicle purchase, and for state vehicle purchases greater than $25,000.00, the procurement summary shall accompany the department/agency generated board of commissioners' agenda request for the proposed state vehicle purchase. 
(f)  Purchase requisitions with the complete state vehicle description will be generated by the department or agency requesting the state vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-3.01) 
Secs. 2-135—2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONTRACTS 

Sec. 2-141. - Types of contracts. 
(a)  General authority. Subject to the limitations of this section and applicable law, any type of contract that is appropriate for procurement and will promote the best interests of the county, as determined by the county in its sole discretion, may be used. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made by the purchasing agent in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the county than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract. A standard contract for services has been adopted by the board of commissioners. Any consultant (service provider) doing business with the county must enter into this standard contract, unless modifications are agreed to by the county manager and the purchasing agent after consultation with the county attorney. 
(b)  Multi-term contracts. 
(1)  Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the county, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding calendar/fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefore. All multi-year contracts shall comply with the applicable requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13. 
(2)  Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term contract, the purchasing agent shall determine in writing: 
a.  That contract requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and 
b.  That such a contract will serve the best interests of the county by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in county procurement. 
(3)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding calendar/fiscal periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent calendar/fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled. 
(c)  Multiple source contracting. 
(1)  General. A multiple source award is an award of a contract for one or more similar supplies or services to more than one bidder or offeror. 
(2)  Limitations on use. A multiple source award may be made when award to two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is necessary for adequate delivery, service or product compatibility. Any multiple source awards shall be made in accordance with the provisions of other sections as applicable. Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the county's needs without sacrifice of economy or service. Multiple source awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier selection to allow for user preference unrelated to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid requirements. 
(3)  Intent to use. If a multiple source award is anticipated prior to issuing a solicitation, the county shall reserve the right to make such an award, and the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation. 
(4)  Determination required. The purchasing agent shall make written determination setting forth the reasons for a multiple source award, which shall be made a part of the procurement file. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.01) 
Sec. 2-142. - Contract clauses and administration. 
(a)  Contract clauses. All county contracts for supplies, services, and construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. A standard contract for services has been adopted by the board of commissioners. Any consultant (service provider) doing business with the county must enter into this agreement, unless the county manager and purchasing agent determine otherwise in writing in their sole discretion and after consultation with the county attorney. 
(b)  Standard clauses and their modification. The purchasing agent, after consultation with the county attorney and county manager, may recommend modifications to standard contract clauses for use in county contracts. If the purchasing agent recommends modifications to the standard contract for services adopted by the board of commissioners, such clauses may be varied, provided that any variations are supported by a written explanation that states the circumstances justifying such variations. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.02) 
Sec. 2-143. - Contract administration. 
The purchasing agent shall maintain a supplier evaluation system designed to insure that contractors are evaluated according to their performance in accordance with the contract terms and conditions. All supplier performance problems that cannot be effectively resolved by those departments receiving the goods or services are to be promptly reported to the purchasing agent for appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.03) 
Sec. 2-144. - Right to inspect plant. 
The county may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of business or work site of a contractor or subcontractor at any tier that is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.04) 
Sec. 2-145. - Right to audit records. 
(a)  Audit of cost or pricing data. The county may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or pricing data pursuant to section 2-130 to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any business that receives a contract or change order for which cost or pricing data is required, shall maintain such books, documents, papers and records that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of final payment under the contract. 
(b)  Contract audit. The county shall be entitled to audit the books, documents and records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated contract or subcontract, other than a firm fixed-price contract, to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance of such contract or sub-contract. Unless a longer retention period is specified by the County, such books, documents and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.05) 
Sec. 2-146. - Reporting of anti-competitive practices. 
When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, or individual(s) responsible for rating proposals, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the state attorney general and the district attorney, county solicitor, or other appropriate legal officer. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.06) 
Sec. 2-147. - County procurement records. 
(a)  Contract file. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the county in a contract file by the purchasing agent. 
(b)  Retention of procurement records. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the county in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the board of commissioners in section 2-7 of the County Code. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.07) 
Sec. 2-148. - Change orders. 
Any change order materially altering the terms of a contract or increasing the total amount to be paid under a contract in excess of $25,000.00 must be approved by resolution of the board of commissioners. The county manager is authorized to execute all other change orders. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-4.08) 
Secs. 2-149—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 2-161. - Maximum practicable competition. 
All specifications shall be drafted by the requesting department and reviewed by the purchasing agent so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and to encourage competition in satisfying the county's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for the county by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-5.01) 
Sec. 2-162. - Brand name or equal specification. 
(a)  Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent determines that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the county's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the county's best interest. 
(b)  Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" (i.e. fungible) references and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(c)  Required characteristics. Unless the purchasing agent determines that the essential characteristics of the brand names included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade, brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, functional and/or performance characteristics which are required. 
(d)  Nonrestrictive use of brand name or equal specifications. Where a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance, and/or characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-5.02) 
Sec. 2-163. - Brand name specification. 
(a)  Use. Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product competition, such specifications may be used only when the purchasing agent makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will satisfy the county's needs. 
(b)  Competition. The purchasing agent shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under section 2-127. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-5.01) 
Secs. 2-164—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND ARCHITECTURAL - ENGINEERING SERVICES 

Sec. 2-171. - Responsibility for selection methods of construction contracting management. 
The county manager shall have discretion to recommend to the board of commissioners the appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular project. In determining which method to recommend, the county manager shall consider the county's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractor's capabilities. The county manager shall execute, and include in the contract file a written statement setting forth the facts which led to the recommendation of a particular method of construction contracting management for each project. All public works construction bidding and contracting, including but not limited to bid security and payment and performance bonds, shall conform to the applicable requirements of O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 91. All contracts for the construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of county roads, including but not limited to bid security and payment and performance bonds, shall conform to the applicable requirements of O.C.G.A. Title 32, Chapter 4, Article 3, Part 2. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-6.01) 
Sec. 2-172. - Bid security—Construction. 
(a)  Requirement for bid security. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the purchasing agent to equal or exceed $100,000.00. Bid security shall be: 
(1)  On the bond form provided by the county; 
(2)  Properly executed by the contractor and surety; and 
(3)  Issued by a surety company determined to be: 
a.  In good standing with the office of the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner; and 
b.  Listed in U.S. Treasury Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on federal bonds, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the county. Nothing in this section shall prevent the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under $100,000.00 when the circumstances so warrant as determined by the purchasing agent. 
(b)  Amount of bid security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. 
(c)  Withdrawal of bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before award, as provided in section 2-122(d), no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid security. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-6.02) 
Sec. 2-173. - Contract performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  When required; amounts. When a public works construction contract is awarded equal to or in excess of $100,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the county and shall become binding on the contractor upon the execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond shall be: 
a.  On the bond form provided by the county; 
b.  Properly executed by the contractor and surety; and 
c.  Issued by a surety company determined to be: 
1.  In good standing with the office of the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner; and 
2.  Listed in U.S. Treasury Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on federal bonds or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the county, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(2)  A payment bond shall be: 
a.  On the bond form provided by the county; 
b.  Properly executed by the contractor and surety; and 
c.  Issued by a surety company determined to be: 
1.  In good standing with the office of the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner; and 
2.  Listed in U.S. Treasury Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on federal bonds or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the county, for the protection of all businesses supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(b)  Reduction of bond amounts. After notice to the board of commissioners, the purchasing agent, except when prohibited by O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 91, is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to 50 percent of the contract price for each bond when a determination is made that is in the best interest of the county to do so. 
(c)  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the county to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-6.03) 
Sec. 2-174. - Fiscal responsibility. 
Every change order in excess of $25,000.00 under a public works construction contract with the county shall be subject to prior approval by the board of commissioners after receiving a report from the county manager as to the effect of the change order on the total project budget or the total contract budget. The county manager is authorized to execute all other change orders. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-6.04) 
Sec. 2-175. - Architectural-engineering services. 
(a)  Public announcement. It is the policy of the county to announce publicly all requirements for architect-engineering services where the cost of the service shall exceed $25,000.00, and to negotiate such contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In the procurement of architect-engineering services, the purchasing agent shall request firms to submit a statement of qualifications and performance data. 
(b)  Selection process. A selection committee composed of three members designated by the county manager (or another officer with appropriate professional qualifications) and the head of the using agency, or his designee, in need of the architect-engineering services shall conduct discussions with no less than three firms (unless only one firm responds) regarding the proposed contract and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for furnishing the required services and shall select from among them no less than three of the firms deemed most qualified to provide the required services. The selection shall be made in order of preference, based on criteria established and published by the selection committee. 
(c)  Negotiation. The purchasing agent or county manager shall negotiate a contract with the firm considered by the selection committee to be the most qualified (responsible and responsive) for architect-engineering services at compensation which the purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the county. In making this decision, the purchasing agent or county manager shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity and the professional nature of the services to be rendered. In determining whether a firm is responsible, the purchasing agent or county manager may consider factors including but not limited to: 
(1)  The past contracting history, performance and experience with the county or any county authority, county office or county agency of the firm or any identified subcontractor of the firm; 
(2)  Whether the firm, or any identified subcontractor of the firm, is currently on the state's suspended or debarred suppliers list, the federal government's list of any debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors and/or any list of suspended, debarred or ineligible contractors maintained by another governmental entity including any other local government; and/or 
(3)  Whether the firm, or any identified subcontractor of the firm, has sufficient experience, financial ability or credit, judgment, reliability, integrity, trustworthiness, facilities, equipment, perseverance and skill which will assure good faith performance. 
Should the purchasing agent or county manager be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a price the purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the county, negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated. The purchasing agent or county manager shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified firm submitting a price determined to be fair and reasonable to the county. If no satisfactory contract can be reached, the purchasing agent or county manager shall formally terminate negotiations. The purchasing agent or county manager shall then undertake negotiations with the third most qualified firm submitting a price determined to be fair and reasonable to the county. Should the purchasing agent or county manager be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract at a fair and reasonable price with any of the selected firms, and if the county wishes to continue with the pending solicitation, the selection committee shall select additional firms in order of their competence and qualifications considered in relation to the fairness and reasonableness of their price, and the purchasing agent or county manager shall continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached. If no satisfactory agreement is reached with any firm, the selection process may be terminated and a new selection process may be initiated. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-6.05) 
Secs. 2-176—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION 

Sec. 2-181. - Authority. 
After reasonable written notice to the business involved and reasonable opportunity for that business to be heard, the board of commissioners, after consultation with the county attorney, is authorized to suspend a business from consideration for award of future contracts upon a finding, based upon adequate evidence, that the business has engaged in any activity that might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period in the discretion of the board of commissioners and not to exceed three years. 
The causes for debarment shall be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction under state or federal statutes for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, or receiving stolen property; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation, within the preceding three years, of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character that is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment. 
(5)  A record of failing to pay employees and/or subcontractors in the performance of a contract with the county, a county authority, a county office and/or a county agency; 
(6)  A record of dishonesty or inaccuracy in its dealings and contract performance with the county, a county authority, a county office and/or a county agency, including but not limited to a record of duplicate invoicing for invoices already paid, inaccuracies in invoice descriptions, inaccurate documentation supporting invoices, excessive change notices, unreasonable difficulty in reaching an agreement on the value of change notices, and threats to stop work that are without merit; 
(7)  Where there is a pending bankruptcy proceeding of a prospective contractor or of any person that owns, controls or manages in whole or in part a prospective contractor; 
(8)  Where there is a pending lawsuit filed by a prospective contractor or by any person that owns, controls or manages a prospective contractor against the county, a county authority, a county office and/or a county agency; 
(9)  Where the county, a county authority, a county office and/or a county agency has a pending lawsuit against a prospective contractor or any person that owns, controls or manages in whole or in part a prospective contractor; 
(10)  Where there is a pending lawsuit against a prospective contractor or any person that owns, controls or manages a prospective contractor by any federal, state or local government with regard to contractual performance, bid irregularities, false representations, false statements or false claims, or violations of International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR); 
(11)  Where a prospective contractor or any person that owns, controls or manages a prospective contractor is currently on the state's suspended or debarred suppliers list, the federal government's list of any debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors, or any suspended or debarred contractor or supplier list of another government entity including any local government; 
(12)  Any other cause the board of commissioners determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a county contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this article; or 
(13)  For violation of the ethical standards set forth in division 9 of this article, Ethics in public contracting. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-7.01) 
Sec. 2-182. - Decision—Issuance, contents. 
The purchasing agent and county attorney shall, when appropriate under this division, issue a written decision to debar or suspend a business. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended business involved of its right of appeal pursuant to section 2-184. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-7.02) 
Sec. 2-183. - Same—Notice. 
A copy of the decision required by section 2-182 shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended business. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-7.03) 
Sec. 2-184. - Finality of decision. 
A decision under section 2-182 shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended business within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision files a writ of certiorari with the Cherokee County Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-7.04) 
Secs. 2-185—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 2-191. - Bid protests. 
(a)  Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the purchasing agent. Protestors are required to seek resolution of their complaints initially with the purchasing agent. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing to the purchasing agent prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved business did not know and should not reasonably have known of any of the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within five calendar days after such aggrieved business knows or reasonably should have known of any of the facts giving rise thereto. 
(b)  Stay of procurements during protests. In the event of a timely protest under subsection (a) of this section, the purchasing agent shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted or until the board of commissioners makes a determination on the record that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the county. Notice of any such stay shall be provided to all prospective bidders, offerors or contractors. The stay provisions of this subsection shall not apply where a contract has actually been awarded. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-8.01) 
Sec. 2-192. - Contract claims. 
(a)  Decision of purchasing agent. All claims by a contractor against the county relating to a contract shall be submitted in writing to the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor may request a conference with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising under a contract or change order, and those based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, rescission, or other cause related to a contract. 
(b)  Notice to contractor of purchasing agent's decision. The decision of the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be immediately mailed or otherwise furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached, and shall inform the contractor of its appeal rights under section (c) of this section. 
(c)  Finality of purchasing agent's decision; contractor's right to appeal. The purchasing agent's decision shall be final and conclusive unless, within ten calendar days from the date of receipt of the decision, the contractor delivers a written appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Failure to render timely decision. If the purchasing agent does not issue a written decision regarding any contract controversy within 15 days after written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed to appeal as if an adverse decision had been received. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-8.02) 
Sec. 2-193. - Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
(a)  Prior to bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals. If the purchasing agent, after consultation with the county attorney, determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state or county law, the solicitation shall be cancelled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
(b)  Prior to award. If, after bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals and after consultation with the county attorney, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state or county law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be cancelled. 
(c)  After award. If, after an award of a contract and after consultation with the county attorney, the purchasing agent determines that the solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law, then the contract shall be declared null and void. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-8.03) 
Sec. 2-194. - Appeal to Superior Court. 
Any final decision under this article may be appealed to the Superior Court of Cherokee County by petition for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-8.04) 
Secs. 2-195—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 

Sec. 2-201. - Criminal penalties. 
To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this division constitute criminal violations, such violations shall be punishable as provided under applicable law. Such criminal penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this division. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.01) 
Sec. 2-202. - Employee conflict of interest. 
(a)  It shall be a prohibited conflict of interest for any county employee to violate the conflicts of interest, gifts, nepotism, or outside employment provisions of the Cherokee County personnel policies. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, the term "county employee" shall exclude independent contractors, members of the board of Commissioners and the County Manager. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.02) 
Sec. 2-203. - Business violations. 
It shall be a prohibited conflict of interest for any business to aid any county employee in a violation of § 2-202. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.03) 
Sec. 2-204. - Use of confidential information. 
It shall be unethical for any employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.04) 
Sec. 2-205. - Sanctions. 
(a)  Employees. The county manager may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a county employee for violations of the ethical standards in this division: 
(1)  Oral or written warnings or reprimands. 
(2)  Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time. 
(3)  Termination of employment. 
(b)  Non-employees. The board of commissioners may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a non-employee for violations of the ethical standards of this division: 
(1)  Written warning or reprimand. 
(2)  Termination of contracts. 
(3)  Debarment or suspension as provided in division 7. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.05) 
Sec. 2-206. - Conflict of interest—Elected officials. 
Public service is a public trust, requiring all officials to place loyalty to the law and ethical principles above private gain. To that end, the board of commissioners prohibit the county from transacting business for procurement of goods and services from any elected official, or through a firm, corporation, partnership or business entity in which they or any member of their immediate family has a financial interest, direct or indirect. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1), § 2-5-9.06) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-O-009, adopted Nov. 16, 2004, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-73, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances listed in the code comparative table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 100 square feet of customer service area within the premises of an applicant. 
Administrator means the county marshal or his designee. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means a business open to the public which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which is not a restaurant. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any similar technical code of the county. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
College means only those state, county, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
County community center means those county-owned events facilities identified as Cherokee County Community Center at Airport Industrial Park, Cherokee County Community Center at Oakgrove, Cherokee County Community Center at Hickory Flat, Cherokee County Community Center at Freehome, Cherokee County Community Center at Ridgemill, and Cherokee County Community Center at Waleska, which are made available for payment rental and use by the general public. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal lineal feet as defined in section 6-24. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Good moral character means the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(1)  A judgment of guilt is a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
a.  At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
b.  He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(2)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the county in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
a.  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
b.  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
c.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
d.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
Indoor recreation establishment means an indoor facility that contains regulation-size courts or alleys where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. 
License means the authorization by Cherokee County to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or with a hotel with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled by the county or any county of the state, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" shall also include any privately owned or leased courtyard or patio which is architecturally visibly defined. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under state laws, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes; no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with a suitable kitchen, dining room space and equipment; and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member, officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families; or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 60 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve non-prepackaged meals for its guests. At least two meals per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted and sales of prepared, cooked, and non-prepackaged meals must be equal to or more than 60 percent of total sales. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means any state, county, church or other private school that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land or fenced areas used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school, where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Service area means that in the event a lounge, private club or restaurant is located adjacent to an indoor recreational establishment and within the same building or structure, the recreational area is defined as being within the service area of such lounge, private club or restaurant and the consumption of alcoholic beverages within the recreational area is permitted. 
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverages. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2010-O-002, § 1, 5-4-10) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)  Giving effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(5)  Protecting against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one area or ownership or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale in the county at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-4. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon conviction in the magistrate court of any violation of any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense, if within 12 months of the first offense, a minimum fine of $750.00; 
(3)  Third offense, if within 12 months of the second offense, a minimum fine of $1,000.00; or 
(4)  Otherwise punishment shall be as set by the magistrate court judge as allowed by the state law. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the board of commissioners for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay excise fees or any other fees or taxes required by the county. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct of the establishment. 
(3)  Acts of disturbance on the establishment. 
(4)  Violence on the establishment. 
(5)  Gambling on the establishment. 
(6)  Conviction of violating this chapter by any court with jurisdiction. 
(7)  Charges of or conviction of a felony by the licensee. 
(8)  Creation or maintenance of a nuisance on the establishment. 
(9)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation given in the application for the license. 
(10)  For any and other just cause. 
(c)  If it comes to the attention of the board of commissioners or county marshal that the licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The county marshal or his designee shall issue a notice of objection to the board of commissioners, which shall include the address of the location and the specific allegations as to the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of this Code. The notice of objection shall also include the recommended action to be taken by the board of commissioners, which may include probation, suspension, or revocation of the license, as well as conditions for maintenance or reinstatement of the license, including and not limited to mandatory responsible sales and server training, with an approved provider, for the licensee, managers, employees, and servers of the licensed establishment. Further, any license under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the county marshal in his notice of objection for any reason outlined in subsection (b) of this section if it is determined that suspension is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The county marshal shall then notify the licensee in writing by certified mail or by personal service that a notice of objection has been filed and of any applicable temporary suspension of the license. The notice to the licensee shall include a copy of the notice of objection, and the time, place, and date for a hearing before the board of commissioners on the matter. The hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of the notice to the licensee. Continuances and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  At the hearing, the county and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses. After this hearing, the board of commissioners shall issue a notice of decision at which time the board of commissioners will dismiss or affirm the objection and/or temporary suspension, and in case of affirmation, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke or place on probation the license of the licensee. 
(3)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decisions and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days of the date of the written decision. 
(5)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be binding upon the retail party or holder of the license. 
(d)  When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the same person, firm or corporation at that location for a period of 24 months from the date of revocation. 
(e)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the county license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the county. 
(f)  All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee, agent, or representative of the licensed establishment, and the owners and officers may be subject to appropriate administrative action related to such violation, including and not limited to suspension and revocation of the license, in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 1, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-5. - License required. 
(a)  No malt beverages, wines, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the county except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter then this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-6. - Types of licenses; number of licenses; renewal. 
(a)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Manufacturing: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(2)  Wholesale: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(3)  Retail: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Ancillary wine sampling license. 
(4)  Consumption on the premises: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(5)  Any combination of the above at the same location provided no retail or wholesale license shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location. 
(b)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, all licenses issued pursuant to this title shall expire on December 31 of each year and application for renewal shall be made annually on or before November 1, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-2-7. 
(d)  No license may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter, except as provided in section 6-25. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2007-O-001, § I, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 2, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-7. - Application procedure. 
The provisions of chapter 86, article III, pertaining to occupational license taxes, shall apply in addition to the following: 
(1)  All applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check, for all the minimum fees and occupational taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(2)  The county application shall include a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and other application forms developed by the administrator. 
(3)  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the county, the acts of the general assembly, known as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, as now or hereafter amended, and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(4)  Any false statement, or material misrepresentation in any application under this chapter, shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted under this article. 
(5)  At all new businesses where an alcoholic beverage license has not previously been issued, or where there is a change of ownership of the alcoholic beverage license, or where there is any change of licensee, and the licensee has not previously attended a responsible alcohol sales and service policy workshop for owners and managers, the licensee shall attend a workshop which has been approved by the board of commissioners. The licensee shall attend said workshop, and proof of completion must be provided, prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license. Such workshop shall be attended by the licensee at the licensee's expense. If, at the time the application is considered by the marshal, the licensee has not provided evidence that the licensee has successfully completed the alcohol sales and service workshop with an approved provider, the application shall be denied. The provisions of this section shall also apply to renewal applications submitted by any existing licensee which has not attended an approved workshop. The workshop provision shall not be waived. Instructors, trainers or any persons associated or employed by the person or organization conducting the training referenced in this subsection shall not appear before any license review board or board of commissioners as a representative, attorney, advocate, or witness for any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 3, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-8. - Plans required. 
All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. In the case of any licensee selling distilled spirits by the package, not for consumption on the premises, such premises shall be freestanding; that is, not located in a shopping center or attached to any other building or establishment. The exterior of the premises shall be of a finished building material such as brick, stone, steel or wood, but not concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar county codes. Applicants shall obtain and file with their applications a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant shall operate his business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-9. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license shall be granted pursuant to this chapter where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  An applicant for a retail license is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
(5)  An applicant, or a corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner or managing agent, is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the county, the county or to the state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-10. - Limitations on who can hold licenses. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No person, related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to any wholesale licensee or employee thereof or any person with any interest therein, shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license issued under this chapter. 
(c)  No elected or full-time appointed official of the county or any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to such an official of the county shall own any interest in any license issued under this chapter unless one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office; 
(2)  The interest is declared in writing at the time the application for the license is made and the elected or full-time appointed official shall not participate in official action or consideration of the license; or 
(3)  The interest obtained in an ongoing business holding a license is declared in writing at the time of the acquisition and filed with the county marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-11. - Prohibition against issuance to persons with criminal convictions. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law, county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(b)  The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contenders or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-12. - Residency requirements; registered agent. 
(a)  For all licenses to be issued under this chapter, the applicant shall have been a resident of the State of Georgia for at least one year prior to making application for the license. 
(b)  All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation or a limited liability company shall name in the application one or more residents of the county as the registered officer of the corporation or limited liability company and such officer shall be registered with the secretary of state's office. This representative of the corporation or limited liability company shall receive all communications, notices, service or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation or limited liability company in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any county license. 
The application shall give the mailing address of such registered officer, and the mailing to any registered officer at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. 
(c)  Such registered officer shall be a representative of the licensee corporation and must be approved by the administrator. The administrator shall refuse to approve any registered officer who is not a bona fide resident of the county or who has been convicted, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. As used in this subsection, the term "conviction" shall have the same meaning as in section 6-11. 
(d)  If any registered officer shall cease to be the registered agent of the licensee corporation or shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered officer within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered officer shall meet the requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section and must be approved by the administrator. 
The county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered officer within the five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer and/or revoke the licensee's license. The application process includes submitting a revised application, fingerprinting of the applicant, criminal history investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 4, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-13. - Police investigation; tax record search. 
(a)  The administrator shall cause an inquiry to be made into the county records to determine if the applicant or other parties with an interest in an application for a license under this chapter has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his property or any other monies owing to the county. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such permit or license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(c)  If the county marshal determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any police department investigation, the police department will issue a detailed report to the administrator regarding the reasons for the denial, and the administrator shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not forwarding the application to the county council for consideration. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the administrator or police department and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(e)  The county marshal shall require in addition to the licensee, fingerprinting and background investigation of any person having a 20 percent financial interest in the application. 
The county marshal may require additional information from any sibling of any person with a financial interest, and the nominated registered agent of any corporate applicant. Should the applicant fail to produce such persons within 30 days of the request, the application may be denied. 
(f)  Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the county marshal and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce those persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in a denial of the application. 
(g)  The county may require 45 days for processing any application for a license required under this chapter. For investigative purposes, the county marshal may extend the 45 days' processing period according to the licensee's compliance should he or she deem it necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-14. - License pending completion of building. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-15. - Time limit on opening business; continuity of business. 
(a)  All licensees under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a county license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the administrator at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(b)  Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-16. - Denial of license application. 
(a)  The county marshal must take action to consider an application for a license required by this chapter within 45 days of the administrator receiving a complete application. 
(b)  The county marshal may deny a county license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this chapter; 
(4)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agent; 
(6)  Failure to pass review by the county marshal; 
(7)  Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this chapter; 
(8)  Failure to meet distance, location exterior surface or building requirements; 
(9)  Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(10)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(c)  All decisions denying a license shall be in writing, with the reasons for denial stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the board of commissioners. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners' decision will be final. 
(e)  An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for 12 months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-17. - Additional standards for issuance, transfer of license. 
(a)  In the issuance of licenses or the transfer or renewal of licenses required by this chapter, the county marshal may, in its discretion, issue or deny any application for a license, renewal or transfer of an existing store location based upon the following standards, in addition to standards previously set forth: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance to schools and churches, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity cause minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure could create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles as required in the zoning ordinance. A licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that the licensee or his spouse is related to any distributor or wholesaler of malt beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law so that there might be special concessions granted the licensee to give him a competitive advantage over others not similarly privileged. 
(5)  For retail package license applicants, where there is evidence that the licensee applicant or his spouse is related in the first degree described therein to other licensees of malt beverages or wine in the county. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold by the applicant or at the establishment to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(7)  Where there is evidence that the conducting of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of minors, allows minors to purchase, drink or possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, or causes the sheriff to answer complaints or provide extra surveillance of the premises. More than three minors without the supervision of a parent or under supervision of an adult authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of minors. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(4)  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(c)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the board of commissioners. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners' decision will be final. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 5, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-18. - Inspections. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the police department or any license inspector of the county or to any person designated by the county marshal. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-19. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)  No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. 
(b)  No establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave those premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to county-sanctioned events. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-20. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  Sales by consumption on premises licensees. Except as provided for in subsection (d) below, no licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for 
consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(b)  Malt beverages and wine package sales. No licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any packaged malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and no person shall purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(c)  Sales on election days. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages (distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages), shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this subsection shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 500 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(d)  Sunday sales. A Sunday sales permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays. The following conditions are applicable to such sales: 
(1)  The establishment must hold a valid county alcoholic beverage pouring license or retail package sales license as applicable to the application for the Sunday sales permit. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and served for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. the following Monday in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(3)  Packaged malt beverages and wine may be sold between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday in an establishment licensed for retail package sales of malt beverages and wine. 
(4)  Applicants for Sunday sales permits shall complete an application form furnished by the county marshal, supplying such information as may be requested. Prior to issuance of a Sunday sales permit for sales by the drink for consumption on the premises, the applicant must make available records for determining whether the applicant meets the sales requirements of subsection (d)(2) of this section. The permit may be denied or revoked for failure to conform or failure to produce satisfactory evidence of conforming as contained in the chapter. 
(5)  Annual Sunday sales permit renewals shall be made in the same manner and during the same time periods as other alcoholic beverage license renewals. All holders and applicants of an alcoholic beverage license and Sunday sales permit must make available records for audit purposes upon the request of the county administrator or his agent. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage holder or applicant shall be open for inspection at any time by agents of the county marshal's department. 
(6)  Sunday sales permits are not transferable. 
(7)  The fee for issuance of the Sunday sales permit for establishments licensed to sell by the drink and Sunday sales permits for establishments licensed for retail sales of packaged malt beverages and wine may be established and/or changed from time to time by the board of commissioners, and a schedule of fees shall be available in the county marshal's office. 
(8)  The Sunday sales permit shall be subject to the revocation procedures of section 6-4, and shall be automatically revoked if the alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(9)  When any application for a Sunday sales permit has been denied for a location, no application for a Sunday sales permit may be made for the same location for a period of 12 months from the date of filing of the application which was denied. 
(10)  No bars as defined in this chapter shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2007-O-006, §§ 1, 2, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 6, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2011-O-009, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 6-21. - Certain places and hours where drinking is prohibited. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions governing the hours of operation of a licensed establishment, no person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(b)  No person shall possess, consume, or transport an open container containing any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, or public places of the county, or upon or within any vehicle upon the premises of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter, or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter. The provision of this subsection pertaining to public places only shall not apply to special events that have been approved in advance and in writing by the marshal's office according to the procedures set forth under section 6-26 of this chapter, such as motorcycle "bike nights," car shows, and similar events which may take place in the parking area of a business establishment holding a license under this chapter. 
(c)  No person shall drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon any county property, within any county-owned park or building, or within the boundaries of any other county-owned facility; with the exception of alcoholic beverages purchased from a vendor licensed to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages at approved scheduled functions at the Cherokee County Conference Center; and with further exception of alcoholic beverages dispensed at scheduled functions held in the Historic Society Museum located within the Cherokee County Historic Courthouse. This provision must be read in conjunction with the employee drug and alcohol policies and procedures set forth in the Cherokee County Personnel Policy Manual and Employee Handbook, as such policies and procedures now exist or may be amended in the future. This provision shall not apply to events sponsored by the county. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be subject to the issuance of a citation by a certified peace officer with jurisdiction over the venue, returnable to the magistrate court of the county. Any persons found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 7, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2010-O-002, § 2, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 2011-003, § 1, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 2015-O-001, § 1, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 6-22. - Drive-in, curb service prohibited. 
(a)  Curb service by retail or consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises, other than by wholesalers licensed under this chapter or by the state, is prohibited. 
(b)  Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-23. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)  No person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, shall permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business or to frequent or loiter about the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  No person shall furnish or serve any person under 21 years of age with any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license may be reasonably accepted by the person hereunder as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)  No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. However, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(f)  No person who is under 21 years of age shall have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the county, any alcoholic beverage. 
(g)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be punishable in the magistrate court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court code of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-24. - Measurement of distances. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements, to determine distances, required by this chapter, for the issuance of county beverage licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel as follows: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or a retail package store; or 
(3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
(4)  All renewal applications shall use the measurements required in the initial application and license. 
(b)  The table below lists the distance in feet which various types of alcoholic beverage sales establishments must meet from an existing regulated land use. 

 
(c)  The distance requirements set forth in the table pertaining to distances from Residential land uses shall not apply when the licensee's establishment is: (1) part of an approved mixed-use or master planned development that includes the particular Residential land use in conjunction with Commercial, Office, or Industrial uses (which phrase "master planned development" includes, but is not limited to, planned development in the TND district); or (2) the licensee's establishment is part of the particular residential development and/or exists to privately serve such residential development. 
(d)  The distance requirements set forth in the table pertaining to distances from Residential land uses may be waived, varied, or modified at the discretion of the board of commissioners upon good cause being shown in consideration of surrounding land use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2007-O-006, § 3, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 8, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-25. - Existing licensed business; compliance. 
(a)  To prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the county in compliance with county ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the license and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance under this section to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance under this section with regard to the county Code requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. These transfers may be approved by the administrator, provided the transferee meets all of the license requirements for a new license. 
(c)  Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter and must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-26. - Temporary permit for special event in parking lot of licensed establishment. 
(a)  The licensee or owner of a business establishment holding a license under this chapter allowing consumption of alcohol on the premises may be issued a special event permit to conduct a special event in the parking lot of the licensed establishment, under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Applications for special event permits must be in writing on forms provided by the marshal and must be received with the applicable fee, as established by the board of commissioners, at least 30 days prior to the date of the scheduled special event. Application forms are available in the marshal's office. 
(2)  Special events must take place entirely within the private parking lot of the licensed establishment. 
(3)  Special events shall comply with all applicable provisions of state and local law pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages and all zoning and land use regulations. 
(4)  The applicant must obtain a permit from the county building department for any tent, canopy, awning, or other structure installed or erected for the event, which covers an area larger than 120 square feet. 
(5)  All signage advertising the event must be approved in writing by the county planning and zoning department. 
(6)  The presence, location, or concentration of persons, animals, structures, vehicles, displays, or other items incident to the conduct of the event shall not interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrians and vehicles entering and exiting the property. 
(7)  The presence, location, or concentration of persons, animals, structures, vehicles, displays, or other items incident to the conduct of the event shall not interfere with access to the event area or contiguous areas by law enforcement, fire, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles. 
(8)  The marshal or his designee may deny or immediately revoke any special event permit if it is determined that the special event violates any provision of state or local law or if it is determined that the sale, distribution, or consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(9)  The establishment shall provide an adequate security detail for the event to ensure proper crowd control and to avoid a breach of the public peace. 
(b)  No licensed establishment shall be permitted to host more than three special events under this chapter in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-002, § 3, 5-4-10) 
Sec. 6-27. - Temporary pouring license for special events by nonprofit organizations. 
(a)  A temporary pouring license may be issued to any person, firm or corporation, for a period not to exceed six days in any one year, for an approved special event conducted by or for the benefit of a certified nonprofit or civic organization. The person, firm or corporation must make application on forms provided by the marshal's office and pay the fee as established by the board of commissioners. The applicant shall be required to comply with all of the general ordinances and licensing and regulations applicable to an establishment licensed for consumption on the premises, with the exception that the full service kitchen requirement shall not apply. 
(b)  The special event must meet the following criteria before the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The special event must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization; and 
(2)  The location and premises at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the board of commissioners, upon recommendation from the marshal or his designee. 
(c)  Any employee or volunteer of the special event licensee, working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the special event but shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(d)  The marshal or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(e)  As a condition precedent to the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee shall indemnify, in writing, and hold Cherokee County and all its departments, agencies, officials, officers, and employees forever harmless from claims, demands, or causes of action that may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(f)  The marshal shall issue the temporary special event license to the applicant upon compliance with the terms hereof and upon approval by the sheriff, board of commissioners, and planning department, as required herein. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person, entity, or organization to sell, dispense, or distribute alcoholic beverages at a special event for a nonprofit or civic organization, except in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-002, § 4, 5-4-10) 
Secs. 6-28—6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX AND REGULATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 86. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-61—6-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 6-81. - Additional application, fee, residency requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the license application requirements of this chapter in article I, a processing fee of $300.00, in addition to other fees and taxes required in this chapter, shall be deposited with the application to cover the expense of investigation and processing of the application and the fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  In addition, the residency requirements of section 6-13 shall be extended, for the purposes of this section, to include residency within the state for three years preceding the date of application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-82. - Limitation on number of licenses to be granted to applicant, family corporation. 
(a)  No application for a license to sell distilled spirits at retail shall be granted where the person applying for the license or any person who would have an interest therein or members of such person's family or any corporation in which the person owns an interest already holds any interest in two or more licenses to sell distilled spirits by the package at retail within the state. The term "family," as used in this section, shall mean any spouse, brother, sister, child or parent of the applicant or any other person who would have an interest in the license under this division. 
(b)  As used in this section, an interest in a license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license; a co-owner of the license; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section, no one person shall be deemed to have more than one interest in any one license. 
(c)  All applications for a license under this division, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his family has in any other retail liquor store and any other similar information called for by the police department or administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 6-83—6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 6-101. - Additional application, fee, structure requirements. 
In addition to the application and license requirements of this chapter in article I, the following shall be required for licenses under this division: 
(1)  Upon filing of the application, the county shall require the applicant to deposit a processing fee of $300.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing of the application and that fee is not refundable. 
(2)  No license under this division shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, lounge or private club. 
(3)  The dining area or service area of any business licensed under this division must be a minimum of 1,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-102. - Manager's permit. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall employ one or more persons as manager for the licensed establishment. At least one manager shall be at the licensee's premises during all times that alcoholic beverages are being consumed thereon, and such manager shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. Each such manager shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section, and this permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Each person wishing to obtain a manager's permit must make application on a form provided by the county marshal, or their designee, within three days of the date of employment. Upon receiving the completed application, the county marshal shall arrange to have the applicant photographed and fingerprinted and to place these records on file. The county marshal shall be authorized to issue a manager's permit after verifying the facts in the application. 
(c)  Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages or sale or possession of illegal drugs in the past five years shall be ineligible to receive a manager's permit. 
(e)  If any manager of the licensee shall cease to be an employee of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator of such event and shall name a new manager within three days after such event occurs. Such new manager shall meet all the requirements of this Code for managers. The county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's manager; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the county and name a new manager within such three-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's manager and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 6-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 9, adopted Apr. 21, 2009, deleted § 6-103. Former § 6-103 pertained to happy hour promotions and derived from Ord. No. 2004-O-009, adopted Nov. 16, 2004. 
Sec. 6-104. - Servers limited to employees. 
Drinks shall be served only by employees of the establishments licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-105. - Lewd dancing prohibited. 
No licensee under this division shall permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 6-106—6-130. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-001, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 2011, repealed § 6-106 which pertained to dangerous weapons prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 2004-O-009, adopted Nov. 16, 2004. 
DIVISION 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-131. - Penalties and revocation. 
(a)  Any licensee who fails to pay the taxes imposed in this division by the county, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the county, within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent per month of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
(b)  The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at a rate of one percent per month. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the day of the month that the amount or any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-132. - Malt beverages. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages within the county as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; and 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-133. - Wine. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-134. - Distilled spirits—Retail package. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, excluding the sale of fermented beverages, of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax upon any fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-135. - Same—Consumption. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-136. - Payment of tax; records and reports; penalty. 
(a)  All taxes, except those levied in section 6-135, shall be imposed on the wholesale dealer, computable and payable monthly. 
Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the incorporated areas of the county, whether delivered to the dealer's place of business for resale, shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on such business in the county: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments and deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to each retail declare; and such records shall be preserved for a period of one year and shall be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the county. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer at the time of delivery of the alcoholic beverages the amount of tax due under the terms of this division and hold the same in trust for the county until such amount is remitted to the county as next provided. 
(3)  On or before the 20th of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the county marshal which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages made to or for retail dealers in the county for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this chapter, including copies of all sales invoices to each retail dealer, and such other information as may be called for by the board of commissioners. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the county marshal of all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(b)  Failure of the wholesale dealer or distributor to remit the taxes required in this division will result in a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-137. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  The tax imposed on retail consumption dealers by section 6-135 shall be payable as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)  Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the county marshal to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the county on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this division. 
(e)  On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the county marshal in such form as the county marshal may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. The return shall be accompanied by remittance to the county marshal of all taxes collected or due as shown on the return. 
(f)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink; amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the county marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2009-O-002, § 10, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 6-138. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any establishment in the county. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this division, and shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized authorities of the county at all times when deliveries are made. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-139. - Failure to collect taxes at delivery; failure to report or remit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to delivery any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer within the incorporated areas of the county without collecting the taxes provided for in this division at the time of delivery. 
(b)  If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this division, the county council shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the board of commissioners may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the county by notifying the state revenue commissioner of the failure and by notifying the retail dealer that further acceptance of deliveries from the wholesaler, until the taxes are paid, may subject the retail dealer to penalty for violation of section 6-140. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-140. - Unpaid taxes, sales are violation. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the incorporated areas of the county any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this division have not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 6-141. - Suspension, revocation or prohibition of retailer's license. 
A violation of this division or other sections of this chapter shall authorize the board of commissioners to suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, the license of any retail party or holder in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 6-4. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-009, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 6-142—6-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ANCILLARY WINE SAMPLING LICENSE 

Sec. 6-150. - Conditions of issuance. 
(a)  Upon a proper request made in writing on an application furnished by the marshal and payment of a nonrefundable filing fee of $250.00, and following investigation and approval by the marshal; the board may issue an ancillary wine sampling license to the holder of a valid and current retail package wine license, to conduct wine sampling on the licensee's retail premises, for an initial period of one year, on the terms and conditions set forth in this article. 
(b)  The annual renewal fee for an ancillary wine sampling license shall be $100.00, which amount is in addition to any other licensing fees or taxes otherwise required to be paid by the licensee under the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. 
Sec. 6-151. - Wine sampling. 
(a)  Not more than two times per week for a period not to exceed five consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine sampling license may conduct wine samplings for groups. 
(b)  Wine sampling shall be conducted either: (1) at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire retail floor area of the premises. The wine counter area shall be cordoned off or otherwise demarcated and separated from the retail sales floor in such a manner that it shall have one means of ingress and egress for customers participating in the wine sampling; or (2) in a sit-down classroom setting that is separated from the retail sales floor when an educational program is presented in conjunction with the sampling. 
(c)  Customers shall not remove open containers of wine from the designated wine sampling area. 
(d)  Samples of wine shall not exceed one ounce per serving, and no individual under 21 years of age shall be permitted to consume any sample. No individual customer shall consume more than eight ounces of wine in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Wine bottles used during the wine sampling shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee of the licensee who is not under 21 years of age. Samples shall be poured only by the licensee or an employee of the licensee who is not under 21 years of age. 
(f)  No opened or unsealed bottles of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  The holder of an ancillary wine sampling license shall not charge a fee to participate in the wine sampling program nor for individual samples provided during a wine sampling. 
(h)  No wine sampling may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits or malt beverages in the unbroken package or container at retail. 
(i)  A wine sampling may only be conducted in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. 
(j)  All wines secured for a wine sampling must be obtained through a wholesale dealer possessing a valid current license to distribute wine in Cherokee County. 
(k)  All wine samplings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of beverage alcohol in Georgia and Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-001, § II, 6-19-07) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-O-004, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, amended chapter 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 10, §§ 10-1—10-100, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 12-27-90, chs. 2—5; Ord. No. 94-10, adopted June 14, 1994; Ord. No. 94-16, adopted Sept. 23, 1994; Ord. No. 98-O-3, adopted Jan. 23, 1998; Ord. No. 2004-O-004, adopted Apr. 20, 2004; and Ord. No. 2004-O-005, adopted July 6, 2004. 
State Law reference— City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 150 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal means any living organism, except a plant, bacterium, or human, which can move voluntarily and has specialized sense organs, included domesticated animals and fowl. 
Animal control board means the board constituted and appointed by the board of commissioners to perform the duties of the animal control board under this chapter. 
Animal control facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment area or premises where any animal is kept or housed by Cherokee County for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
Animal control officer means the county marshal or his/her designees, who shall serve as dog control officers for purposes of article III of this chapter, as contemplated by Title 4, Chapter 8, Article 2 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dogs' running at large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner. Hunting and tracking dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission. Working farm dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when acting in conjunction with farming operations and/or otherwise under the general command of the owner. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
Fighting dog means any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Fighting dogs are illegal in Cherokee County. 
Guard or protection dog means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A dog shall not be considered a guard or protection dog if it otherwise meets the criteria for being defined as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs, or any other hoofed animal used for pleasure or profit. Fowl and rabbits are expressly included within this definition. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, or other signs of health problems. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued citations or summonses in unincorporated areas of this county. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are so constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
Sanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and the offending animal may be immediately impounded by the marshal's office pending disposition of the citation by the court. Any person violating this chapter, may be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance, and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment, in addition to the more stringent penalties that are provided for under state law for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Each act or omission in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of any sentence, may do a combination of any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in Cherokee County any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Order that the animal be removed from the county; 
(3)  Order that the animal be surrendered to the county animal control facility; 
(4)  Order that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Order restitution to the victim(s). 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-28. - Adoption of chapter by municipalities within county boundaries. 
In accordance with state law, Cherokee County may enter into agreements with the municipalities located within the territorial limits of the county to provide animal control services within the corporate limits of such municipality. 
Pursuant to such agreement, any municipality in the county may adopt this chapter. Any municipality adopting this chapter must authorize enforcement by the Cherokee County Marshal's Office. Municipal ordinances must provide that the incorporated areas shall be subject to the fees charged by the marshal's office and that all fees charged by the Cherokee County Marshal's Office shall be retained by the county to defray the costs of the marshal's office related to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-29. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of any dog to fail to keep a dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, guardian, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other proper enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indicating that the system is in place; 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsections (1) or (2) above, while on the owner's property; 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. An exception shall be made for the limited purpose of allowing the animal's owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian to temporarily restrain the animal by such means to allow the animal's needs to be met, such as the time necessary to clean the animal's living quarters, feed, and water. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (b)(1), the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of guard or protection dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of any guard or protection dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
(2)  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(3)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on the property, have the dog(s) microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the marshal's office. 
There shall be a fee for each guard or protection dog for the first year or any part thereof that the dog is in the county and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
(4)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall report to the marshal's office within 24 hours of any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; 
d.  Death of the dog. 
(5)  A guard or protection dog shall be deemed under control only when the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dogs prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length. 
(d)  Dogs found running at large or in violation of this section, may be immediately impounded by officers of the marshal's office or any law enforcement officer. 
(1)  Any animal that is impounded under this section shall not be returned to its owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian in any event without strict proof of compliance with the provisions of this section 10-29. 
(2)  If the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian has not complied with this provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded or within 20 days of the date of disposition of the charges by the court if the marshal's office has determined to hold the dog pending such disposition, said dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  The marshal's office or any law enforcement officer may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of a dog believed to be in violation of this section. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-30. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with the marshal's office, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the respective entity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-31. - Transient dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the county, or entering the county only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar, and tag sections of this article. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-32. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, and have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of animal fighting. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on an animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers who euthanize animals under the direction of the marshal's office per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture, and this article shall not be guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him/her or another person or animal, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-33. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal, excluding livestock maintained on properly zoned property, that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; 
(2)  Attacks a human or another animal without provocation; 
(3)  Makes any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent; 
a.  These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
b.  Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. 
c.  Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner, and a physical description of the offending animal. 
d.  If the disturbance is not resolved within two days, or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept; 
(5)  Is in heat and not confined within a secure enclosure to prevent unintentional breeding; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or fail to control an animal in such a manner that results in the animal becoming a public nuisance animal, and the owner, guardian, or possessor of a public nuisance animal may be cited for violation of this section. 
(c)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded immediately by an animal control officer, and the animal may remain impounded pending the court's disposition of the charges against the owner, guardian or possessor of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2009-O-001, § 1, 4-7-09) 
Sec. 10-34. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after three days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the marshal's office by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. 
Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, fighting, or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the Cherokee County Animal Shelter shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the Cherokee County Animal Shelter schedule of fees, and charges may also include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(c)  Any person adopting an intact animal shall cause to have the animal spayed or neutered (sterilized) within a period specified as follows, within 30 days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six months, or within the first six months of age for sexually immature animals. Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by the marshal's office. 
If an animal becomes pregnant after the time specified for the animal to be spayed, the owner may receive a citation for violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-35. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control facility. The marshal's office shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within three days after notice or attempted notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded, and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period, unless the marshal's office has determined that the animal should be held pending disposition of charges by the court. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control facility. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the marshal's office evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the marshal office shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the marshal's office may, upon approval of the marshal, proceed with euthanization and prepare a complete report on the reason for euthanization. 
This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal. 
(c)  Upon approval of the marshal, and at the request and expense of the owner, impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing, provided that the owner can demonstrate to the marshal's office that the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-36. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner within three days of the mailing of notice to the owner, or an animal of unknown ownership is not adopted within three days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the director of the animal shelter to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. 
An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the three-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the animal shelter. Animals may be released to approved rescue groups or to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be euthanized under the direction of the director of the animal shelter in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the director of the animal shelter, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-37. - Biting animals and quarantine. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Cherokee County Board of Health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined to the animal control facility, veterinarian's hospital, or at a boarding facility approved by the marshal or under home supervision with the approval of the marshal for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal during this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(c)  Unvaccinated or unwanted animals bitten or scratched by a known potentially rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. 
(1)  If the owner of the unvaccinated animal is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, upon approval of the marshal, the exposed animal shall be placed in quarantine for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. 
(2)  The owner or possessor is responsible for quarantining the exposed unvaccinated animal in strict compliance with the policies and procedures of the animal control unit and county board of health and for all costs associated with same. 
(d)  Dogs and cats that are bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal that are current on their vaccinations shall be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the marshal. 
(e)  For purposes of subsections (c) and (d), any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal including, but not limited to, bobcats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, or coyotes, which are not available for testing, should be considered exposed to rabies. 
(f)  Failure to comply with the quarantine and/or confinement requirements of this section, the marshal's office, or the county board of health constitutes a violation of this article and may result in the impoundment of the animal. In that event, the owner or possessor remains responsible for all veterinary, boarding, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the quarantined animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-38. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with adequate food and adequate water and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents, or injury to any person or property. Owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents, or injuries. Those who provide boarding/pasturing space and/or services for hire shall have the responsibility for enclosure maintenance as described in this subsection. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock impounded for violation of this article or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment, plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animals may be given to persons willing to accept them, in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-39. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Game and Fish Division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division, for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement, as may be necessary and as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-40. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Officers of the marshal's office are authorized to remove dead animals from public property. 
(b)  Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-41. - Vaccines used and time of vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored, or residing within the limits of the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than four months of age. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by four months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons. 
(c)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in his/her possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies, but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-42. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering antirabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to provide evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the marshal's office upon request by the marshal's office, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-43. - Animal license. 
(a)  The owner, possessor, or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the unincorporated area of the county must obtain and possess a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  Upon vaccination, county veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-44. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner, or possessor, to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this section only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-45. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-46. - Citations; summons; subpoenas. 
(a)  The animal control officer or county law enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may choose not to impound the animal or livestock found in violation of any section of this chapter, but may return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal or livestock to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction on a certain day to stand trial for the violation(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation(s) of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control officer or a county law enforcement officer, a subpoena may be issued to any witness or the person(s) complaining to appear on the day and time set for trial to testify on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-47. - Liability of the county, marshal's office, officers, and employees. 
The county, the marshal's office, and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control facility or any facility designated by the marshal's office to house such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-48. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-49. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-50. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-51. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane/adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-52. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above, outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-53. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed, unless the animal is humanely secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. No animal shall be transported in the trunk of a vehicle or under a pickup truck's tonneau cover. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-54. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a county business license, and maintains at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property, including but not limited to, public parks. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-55. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this chapter or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in Cherokee County any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this chapter and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their Cherokee County household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 10-56. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture to breed an animal if they are required by the Georgia Department of Agriculture to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-004, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 10-57—10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 2012, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 10-71—10-80, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-O-004, adopted Sept. 4, 2007. 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et seq. 

Sec. 10-71. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1, et seq. (the "Act"), relating to dangerous dog and vicious dog control, and in some instances, to strengthen the requirements of the Act in furtherance of a community that is safe and secure from the harms of dangerous and vicious dogs. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to amend or supersede any other ordinances relating to animal control. Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in this chapter and in the Act. 
(b)  (1)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a potentially dangerous dog in Georgia shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(2)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in Georgia shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(c)  The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (b) of this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-72. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a police officer or military officer to carry out the police or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be considered a dangerous dog, or vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under Chapter 5 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-73. - Classification as dangerous dog or vicious dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within the county, the animal control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. When the animal control officer classifies any dog as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog under this article, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner within 72 hours of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's determination of the dog's classification as a dangerous or a vicious dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the animal control board shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within the allotted time, the classification of the dog as a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request. 
(b)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request, provided that such hearing may be continued by the animal control board for good cause shown. The animal control board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. 
The animal control board shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the classification of the dog by the animal control officer. Within ten days of the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the owner in writing, by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog is a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to subsection (c) below, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. Unless the board determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the animal control officer's classification. 
(c)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in this section, to have caused serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012 shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-74. - Requirements for possession of dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  Any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a dangerous or vicious dog shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of such dog for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, be issued a certificate of registration for, or have custody or control of a dangerous dog or vicious dog except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a proper enclosure set forth in subsection 10-29(b)(l), owners, possessors, guardians or custodians who maintain their dangerous or vicious dog out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the dangerous or vicious dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or vicious dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in subsection 10-29(b)(l) and subsection (b)(1), above, unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape and under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be unattended with minors. 
(3)  The premises where a dangerous dog or vicious dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign, warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises which presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides and on each side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two signs, as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall maintain at all times a policy of general or specific liability insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog, which policy shall be issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state. 
(5)  The animal control officer, or his designee, shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or vicious dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall have a microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog. 
(7)  The owner of a classified dog shall have the dog spayed or neutered. 
(8)  No owner of a classified dog shall keep such dog within 200 yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, day care, grocery store, hospital, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, pediatric office, or walking trail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-75. - Registration of dangerous dogs and vicious dogs. 
(a)  No dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be permitted to remain within the county without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition to the annual registration fees provided otherwise in this article, the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall pay an annual registration fee and shall register such owner's dog as a dangerous dog or vicious dog according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. 
No dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the applicable provisions of this article have been and are being met. 
(b)  Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier transfer of ownership or possession of a dangerous dog or a change in the location of the dangerous dog's primary habitat. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, the animal control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with the provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from one jurisdiction within the State of Georgia to the county shall register the classified dog with the county within ten days of becoming a county resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into the county from another state shall register the dog as required by this article within 30 days of becoming a county resident. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration, or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the county, does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(e)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(f)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(g)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person (or to any person residing with such person) who has been convicted (from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence) of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstacy as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31.1. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-76. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
(a)  Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog, the transferor shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. It shall be unlawful to transfer ownership or possession of any dangerous dog to any transferee residing in Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(b)  Any transferee of a dangerous dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(c)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-77. - Notice to animal control officer. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall notify the animal control officer, in person or by telephone, within 24 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
(1)  The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult. 
(2)  Such dog has attacked a human being or other animal. 
(3)  Such dog has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person. 
(4)  The dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(5)  The dog is leaving Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-78. - Confiscation and disposition of dogs. 
(a)  A police officer or animal control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any animal control officer or by a police officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article. All fines and all charges for services performed by a police or animal control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(d)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall govern, as to classified dogs, over any contrary provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-79. - Report to district attorney and solicitor. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall report to the district attorney the conduct of any owner which the animal control officer believes may constitute a felony under the Act. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall report to the solicitor the conduct of any owner that the animal control officer reasonably believes may constitute a misdemeanor under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 10-80. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, and any such violation or failure to comply shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of section 10-27 of this chapter. In addition to any other penalty that is available under this chapter, the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or vicious dog who violates this article shall be subject, at a minimum, to the penalties as set forth in the Act, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 2, 12-4-12) 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-010, § 3, adopted Dec. 4, 2012, repealed Art. IV, § 10-111, which pertained to vicious dogs and derived from Ord. No. 2007-O-004, adopted Sept. 4, 2007. 

Sec. 10-111. - Reserved. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-O-004, §§ 1.1—9.11, adopted Nov. 4, 2008, amended ch. 14, arts. II—IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 14, arts. II—IV, §§ 14-26—14-64, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-1, §§ 1, 3, adopted Feb. 26, 1993; Ord. No. 99-O-1, adopted Jan. 12, 1999; and Ord. No. 2001-011, §§ 1—9, adopted Aug. 14, 2001. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Technical building and construction codes adopted. 
(a)  It is the intent of the board of commissioners to enforce the latest editions of the following State of Georgia Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the State of Georgia from time to time. The following codes are hereby adopted for enforcement by reference as though they were copied fully herein: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 112 and Section 114 through Section 116 of Chapter 1 of such International Building Code for administration of such Code. 
(2)  International Mechanical Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 108 and Section 110 of Chapter 1 of such International Mechanical Code for administration of such Code. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 108 and Section 110 of Chapter 1 of such International Fuel Gas Code for administration of such Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 108 and Section 110 of Chapter 1 of such International Plumbing Code for administration of such Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 112 and Section 114 through Section 116 of Chapter 1 of the International Building Code for administration of the Electrical Code. 
(6)  International Residential Code with Georgia Amendments; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 111 and Section 113 through Section 114 of Chapter 1 of such International Residential Code for administration of such Code. 
b.  The county further adopts Appendix S of the 2018 Georgia State Amendments to the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings. 
(7)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; 
a.  The county further adopts Section 101 through Section 107 of Chapter 1 of such International Swimming Pool and Spa Code for administration of such Code. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code is hereby adopted as the energy code of the county. 
(b)  There shall be not less than one copy of the aforementioned codes, regulations, and standards filed in the office of the director of building development services, and the codes, regulations, and standards referenced hereto are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out completely in this article. 
(c)  Within such aforementioned codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official of the county who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(d)  Should any provision of the above adopted codes conflict with any provision of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County, Georgia, that provision of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County, Georgia shall prevail. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of such ordinance and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 91-19, §§ 1, 8, 10-8-91; Ord. No. 94-18, §§ 1, 2, 10-28-94; Ord. No. 95-O-17, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 2018-O-007, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 14-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-007, § 1, adopted August 21, 2018, repealed § 14-2 in its entirety. Former § 14-2 pertained to appendices hereby repealed, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-O-003, adopted April 6, 2004. 
Secs. 14-3—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be the "Cherokee County Property Maintenance Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 1.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-32. - Findings and determination of necessity. 
(a)  The board of commissioners finds that there are a number of residential and nonresidential properties in Cherokee County that are poorly maintained and neglected by their owners. These properties adversely affect citizens who own or occupy nearby buildings and dwellings by lowering property values and rental values. 
(b)  These adverse effects also increase the incidence of vandalism and fire. The board of commissioners finds that the elimination and prevention of these conditions is necessary and is in the best interest of the county and its citizens. 
(c)  Additionally, the board of commissioners finds that in Cherokee County there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Cherokee County. The board of commissioners finds that it is necessary and in the best interest of the county and its citizens to utilize the authority granted to the county by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, et seq., to repair, close or demolish unfit dwellings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 1.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-33. - Scope and applicability. 
This article shall apply to all commercial, office, industrial, multifamily and single-family residential structures and properties, and any person owning, occupying, managing or controlling any such property in Cherokee County. This article shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and property, as well as any future construction. 
(1)  Every property (including unimproved lots) and every building, dwelling or structure in the unincorporated area of the county, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, regardless of when such building, dwelling or structure may have been constructed, altered or repaired. When a building, dwelling or structure is vacant, the owner, immediately upon vacating, shall ensure the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish and debris, secure the building, dwelling or structure in a closed and inaccessible manner until occupied, and continue maintaining the exterior of the property in compliance with this article. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not be mandatory for existing buildings, dwellings or structures designated by the state or the county as historic buildings when such buildings, dwellings or structures are judged by the marshal to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas in compliance with this article shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owners and tenants. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 1.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-34. - Penalties. 
(a)  The marshal and his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all the provisions of this article. Failure to comply with any requirement of this article shall constitute a violation subject to citation and penalty as provided herein. 
(b)  Upon the first violation of any of the provisions of this article, a warning citation shall be issued by the marshal. Upon the second violation of any of the provisions of this article, a citation shall be issued and the individual shall go before the Cherokee County Magistrate Court. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the marshal may, in his discretion, issue a citation, without warning, upon a first violation of the litter control provisions of division 5 of this article. Upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, the offending person will be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and shall be subject to criminal penalties not to exceed $1,000.00. For purposes of sentencing, the first citation before the magistrate court shall be deemed the "first offense," however, consideration may be given by the court to the previous warning citation. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to preclude Cherokee County from pursuing any and all other remedies provided by law, including, but not limited to, pursuit of a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or other appropriate legal action, or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate the unlawful use or activity. 
(d)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offence. Additionally, each day of noncompliance with the terms of this article is considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 1.4, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIA, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 14-35. - Definitions. 
Terms not defined herein shall have their meaning as defined in the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, the development regulations, building codes and any other applicable portion of the Cherokee County Code of Ordinances, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary meaning. Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling room", "property", "building", "rooming house", "rooming unit", or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the chief marshal or designee authorized by the board of commissioners and charged with the responsibility for administering the provisions of this article. This term is also synonymous with "public officer" for purposes of this article. 
Authorized litter receptacle means a litter storage and/or collection receptacle as defined or required by this article. 
Building means any structure upon a property, presently or formerly used or intended to be used in whole or in part for residential uses or the purpose of commerce, trade, manufacture, business, government, worship, education, office, medical, storage or any other purpose. 
Business building shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale, or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns, and other structures on property used for business purposes. 
Certified mail means that class or type of mail designated by the U.S. Postal Service as "certified mail" and also includes the class or type of mail designated as "registered mail" and "registered mail, return receipt requested". 
Collector car means a car or light truck more than 20 years old that is in good operating and cosmetic condition or in the process of being restored to good condition. 
Commercial, industrial, or heavy vehicle or equipment means any of the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle with more than two axles; or 
(2)  Any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of 20,000 pounds; or 
(3)  Any bulldozer, tractor/backhoe, or similar heavy construction equipment. 
(4)  This definition shall not apply to school buses as that term is defined herein. 
Compost pile means plant debris, soil and other putrescible wastes stacked so as to encourage rapid decomposition for the ultimate use as plant fertilizer. 
County means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Court means a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Demolish means to destroy a building and to remove all debris and waste materials from the lot on which the building stood. 
Deteriorate means to decay, decompose, degenerate, disintegrate or weaken to an extent that an object's intended use is compromised. 
Deterioration or deteriorated means the fact or process of decay or degeneration which has progressed to the point where it has resulted in or will soon result in making an object or mechanism unsafe, unsanitary, inoperable, unusable or unsuitable for its intended use, including, but not limited to the advanced stage of rot, rust, mold, vermin ingestion, infestation or destruction. 
Drop box means a container for the disposal of litter of a capacity of at least ten cubic yards and not more than 30 cubic yards. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter. The use of this term is generic and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Dumpster monitor means the marshal or his/her designee. 
Dwelling means a building that contains one or more dwelling units, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes, including single-family, duplex and multifamily residential buildings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes and industrialized home, but not including, hotels and motels. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, designed for the exclusive use of a family maintaining a household. 
Emergency means a condition which is a violation of this article and which constitutes an imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid death, injury or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of real or personal property. 
Exterior property means open space on the property and on any adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such property. 
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided however that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Garbage means any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetative material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered. 
Garbage bag means a plastic, or other similar nonporous materials, bag or sack designed specifically to contain garbage or household trash in a secure, airtight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Graffiti means images or letters scratched, scrawled, painted or marked in any manner on property, which is unsightly and unwanted by the property's owner or occupant. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, sampler, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature, political or nonpolitical, for profit or nonprofit, for commercial or noncommercial purposes not included in the definitions of "newspaper" except the word "handbill" shall not include any notice or any document relating to legal proceedings, court proceedings, or action of any government agency including Cherokee County. 
Hazardous means a condition which is a violation of this article and which the marshal has determined to be likely to result in the death, injury or illness of a human or in severe damage to real or personal property. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Heavy vehicle or equipment. See "commercial, industrial or heavy vehicles or equipment", defined herein. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or contiguous to a structure or property. 
Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any type, or any parts thereof, which is an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled, abandoned, discarded, or which does not have a valid license plate where required and it is incapable of movement by its own power, or it remains in place for a period of more than seven days. 
Inspector means any employee of Cherokee County whose responsibilities include enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Intended means: (a) the purpose, operation and/or arrangement for which something has been designed or built; or (b) the purpose, operation and/or arrangement for which something is currently safely and legally being used. 
Interested parties means: (1) owner; (2) those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (3) those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; (4) any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of an easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and (5) persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle which either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled to the extent it may not be lawfully driven on the public roads. 
Junkyard includes land on which two or more junk vehicles are parked, standing or allowed to remain. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Litter receptacle means a container for the disposal of litter of not more than 60-gallon capacity; provided that garbage containers or other waste containers serving single-family or multifamily residences are not included in this definition. 
Marshal means the Cherokee County Marshal or his/her designee. This term is synonymous with "administrator" and "public officer" for purposes of this article. 
Medium-duty truck or equipment means a truck or trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating between 10,000 and 20,000 pounds, or equipment of the nature of a standard farm or landscaping tractor or skid steer or inloader. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, any newspaper duly entered with the U. S. Postal Service Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold or distributed to the public. 
Nonresidential means any structure or portion of a structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use other than a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling, building, or structure, or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any property, dwelling, dwelling unit, building, or structure, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any property, dwelling, dwelling unit, building, or structure, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, real estate agent, mortgagor, bank, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other public area in Cherokee County, owned or used by Cherokee County, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Property means any lot, unit or parcel of land inclusive of any dwelling, building, structure or improvements located thereon. This also includes vacant lots that do not have any dwelling, building, structure or improvement located thereon. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the county. 
Public officer shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized by law to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. This term shall be synonymous with "administrator" and "marshal" for purposes of this article. 
Public record shall mean deeds, mortgages and other instruments of record relating to land titles. 
Rat control shall mean block sanitation, distribution of rat poison, and/or the setting of rat traps or such other methods recommended by a licensed pest control operator, as may be approved to control the rat, rodent and/or vermin population. 
Rat harborage means any condition under which rats, rodents and/or vermin may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrances of rats into any business building. 
Rat-proofing shall mean collectively a form of rat-proofing, rodent-proofing, and vermin-proofing which will prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings through the exterior walls, ground, or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The material to be used for rat-proofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement concrete mortar, sheet metal, 24 or 26-gauge wire cloth of not less than 19-gauge having a mesh not larger than three-eighths of an inch. All material for rat-proofing shall be of such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated in a metal frame conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills and jambs of not exceeding three-eighths of an inch. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicular-type unit designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use that either has its own motorized power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. This shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes. This shall also include boats, personal watercraft, wave runners, all-terrain vehicles, trailers of any type, or school buses. Recreational vehicles are not permitted to have attachments such as stairs, steps, handrails, porches, decks and the like. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, residue from street cleaning and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Regular mail means that class of mail designed by the U.S. Postal Service as "first class" mail. Regular mail shall also include post cards and postal cards. 
Residential means any structure or portion of a structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
Residential district or residential property or residential-zoned property means property approved for residential use according to the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Responsible person means an owner, operator, and/or a person or persons designated in this article as being responsible for meeting the standards of this article. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court, and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rooming house shall mean any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or occupant to three or more persons who are not related by genetics, adoption or marriage. 
Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms within a dwelling used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust or other similar materials. 
Safe means a condition that is not likely to do harm to humans or to real or personal property. 
Sanitary means the absence of a condition that is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or conducive to harboring insects, rodents or other pests. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
School bus means any school bus owned or operated by the Cherokee County School System or other public school system, or any school bus owned or operated by any private educational facility doing business in Cherokee County. 
Signature means the handwritten name of a person or a facsimile thereof. 
Structure means anything constructed or placed upon a property which is supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure, including but not limited to, garages, sheds and racks, but not including a currently operable licensed vehicle, trailer or recreational vehicle. 
Structural alterations shall mean any change in the supporting members of a building such as hearings, walls, columns, beams, or gutters, except repair or replacement of supporting members. 
Trash means waste materials and items which are not in good repair or are discarded and which are of little or no value, including, but not limited to, plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, used or salvaged building materials, packing and clothing, appliances, equipment, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal, scrap lumber, masonry blocks, disassembled vehicle parts or dismantled portions of vehicles. 
Unfit for human habitation means designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. This term shall specifically include, but not be limited to, dwellings or dwelling units that lack basic sanitation such as connection to public water and sewer or septic necessary for supply of potable water. 
Unsafe means a condition that is reasonably likely to do harm to humans or property if not corrected or stopped. 
Vehicle means any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train cars, and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to vehicles on the roadway. 
Vermin means rodents, birds and insects that are destructive of real or personal property or injurious to health. 
Weeds means vegetative growth including, but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths. This term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables and gardens. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrubs, and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 2.1, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIA, 10-20-09) 
Secs. 14-36—14-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-61. - Property maintenance required. 
All property regulated by this division, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall meet or exceed the standards of this division. All property shall be maintained in a manner so as to ensure that the property is not unsafe, uninhabitable, or a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-62. - Unoccupied structure security. 
A dwelling, building or structure that is not physically occupied by a person, or any such part thereof, shall be kept secured by the owner against unauthorized entry and water damage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-63. - Swimming pools. 
Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any property. All swimming pools shall have a five-foot continuous barrier around the pool in accordance with the requirements of Appendix G of the International Residential Code as adopted by Cherokee County Resolution 2005-R-069, July 5, 2005, for single-family residential pools and the Cherokee County Board of Health Swimming Pool Regulations for Community and Commercial Pools, all as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-64. - Outdoor storage. 
There shall not be maintained on a property for more than 15 calendar days any used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixtures, yard waste or equipment stored so as to be visible from any public road or from an adjoining property, unless appropriate permits have been obtained from the county. Nothing herein shall preclude the storage of stacked firewood for use on the property. This section shall not apply to construction sites for which all applicable permits have been issued by the county and such storage is compliant with all other applicable rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.4, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-65. - Trees and shrubs. 
No tree, shrub or other vegetation shall block safe vision on a sidewalk, drive or road. No dead tree, dead parts thereof, fallen trees, or fallen parts thereof that threaten adjacent structures, people, property, or public roads shall be permitted on any property regulated by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.5, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-66. - Grass, underbrush or weeds. 
No grass, underbrush or weeds shall be permitted or allowed to grow to a height greater than 12 inches above ground level; however, this does not apply to agriculturally zoned property, property used for agricultural purposes, county-designated green space of residentially zoned property, or areas of residentially zoned property existing in their natural, undisturbed state. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.6, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-67. - Health and sanitation. 
All exterior property shall be sanitary and free of trash and garbage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the composting of vegetative materials is allowed provided that it does not create odors, health hazards or nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.7, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-68. - Graffiti. 
Any person who causes graffiti to appear on property shall be subject to penalty under this article, as well as all other applicable criminal laws. The owner of the property on which the graffiti appears shall be responsible for removal of the graffiti, whether by cleaning the graffiti off, painting over the graffiti, or otherwise. Failure by the property owner to remove the graffiti within 30 days of written notice to do so by the marshal shall constitute a violation of this article by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.8, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-69. - Tenant responsibility for maintenance. 
A tenant, in addition to the owner, shall be responsible for complying with the standards of this division on that portion of the property controlled exclusively by the tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.9, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-70. - Owner responsibility for maintenance. 
The owner of a property shall be responsible for complying with the standards set forth in this division, except as otherwise stated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 3.10, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-71. - Maintenance of real property after casualty damage. 
All buildings or structures not being presently and physically occupied, which have been rendered hazardous by fire or other acts of nature, shall immediately be made secure by the owner and/or operator to prevent unauthorized access to the hazardous property. If the property remains physically unoccupied and hazardous to public health and safety 90 days after the casualty damage occurred, the owner and/or operator shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article, including, division 7 of this article for abatement of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, art. 4, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 14-72—14-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RAT INFESTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 14-96. - Business buildings. 
(a)  The owners of all business buildings shall have such buildings rat-proofed, and kept rat-proofed in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Whenever conditions inside or under any such business buildings or on any property on which a business building is located provide harborage for rats such that the marshal deems it necessary that such harborage be eliminated, the marshal shall order the owner to take such steps toward the elimination of the harborage as the marshal, in his/her discretion, deems essential. Failure to obey an order of the marshal after a given date for compliance shall constitute a violation of the division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-97. - Duties of occupants of business buildings. 
The occupants in charge of any business buildings or property on which a business building is located in Cherokee County shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Store all garbage in a rat-proof metal container or other type approved by the marshal, pending removal of such garbage; 
(2)  Keep business buildings and property on which a business building is located free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage for rats; and 
(3)  Maintain such buildings and/or property on which a business building is located in a rat-free condition by pursuing a program of rat. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-98. - Duties of owners and occupants of dwellings. 
Owners and occupants of dwellings in Cherokee County shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public area of the dwelling and the property on which the dwelling is located. 
(2)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a condition not conducive to rat infestation those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and property thereof that he occupies and controls. 
(3)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his/her rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(4)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his/her garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be rat-proofed, insect-proofed, watertight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tight-fitting covers or similar closures; and shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage and refuse container liners, but shall not be used without the container for on-site storage of garbage or refuse. Other types of containers meeting the requirements of this article may be specifically approved by the marshal. 
(5)  Bulk storage containers which are used for the storage of garbage, refuse, and/or other putrescible waste shall be placed on concrete platforms which are constructed to minimize spillage onto the adjacent areas. 
(6)  The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(7)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of each occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers. 
(8)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of rats on the property, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(9)  No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials, if any, must be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(10)  No owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or its property. Materials stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(11)  No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in a site accessible to rats. 
(12)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary, and operable condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-99. - Maintenance of rat-proofing. 
(a)  The occupants of all rat-proofed buildings are required to maintain the property in a rat-proofed condition and to repair all breaks that may occur in the rat-proofing, unless such breaks develop as the result of natural deterioration of the building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or other person to remove the rat-proofing from any building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.4, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-100. - Performance of rat-proofing. 
The owner of any business building in complying with the provisions hereof relative to rat-proofing, and the occupant of any business building in pursuing a program of rat control may do the work himself; or may engage a contractor to do the work, or may have the work performed by the employment of such labor and the purchase of material as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.5, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-101. - Inspections. 
The marshal is hereby authorized to make inspection of all buildings and property in Cherokee County for the purpose of determining the conditions as to rat-proofing and rat infestation where there is reasonable cause for the marshal to believe that rat, rodent, or vermin infestation or harborage exists. All owners and occupants of buildings and property shall permit such inspection when requested by the marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 5.6, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 14-102—14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNFIT DWELLINGS OR BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-121. - Unfit dwellings and buildings defined. 
Any dwelling or building which has any or all of the following defects shall be deemed unfit for human habitation: 
(1)  Any dwelling or building whose walls or vertical members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line suspended from the top edge of such member shall fall outside of a distance from the edge equal to one-third of the thickness of such members. 
(2)  Any dwelling or building which has support member or members which have deteriorated to such an extent as to be unable to safely support the applied loads or which have 40 percent damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting, enclosed, or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Any dwelling or building which has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Any dwelling or building which has been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants. 
(5)  Any dwelling or building which has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
(6)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an unobstructed means of egress leading to an open space at ground level, whether such unobstructed egress is at ground level or via steps to ground level. 
(7)  Any dwelling or building which has wiring that is dangerous due to lack of insulation, improper fuses, inadequate grounding, lack of capacity of wires or other dangerous condition. 
(8)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an installed kitchen sink in each dwelling unit properly connected to the hot and cold water supply pipes and the sewer system, and which connection is actively providing a potable water supply. 
(9)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an installed tub or shower and lavatory properly connected to hot and cold water supply pipes and sewer system, and which connection is actively providing a potable water supply. 
(10)  Any dwelling or building which does not have a flush-type water closet located in a room affording privacy and properly connected to the water supply pipes and sewer system, and which connection is actively receiving a water supply so as to allow a toilet to be flushed. 
(11)  Any dwelling or building which does not have installed and operational (i.e., electricity running through the lines) electric lighting facilities installed and functioning in accordance with the minimum requirements of the National Electric Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 6.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-122. - Renting an unfit dwelling or building. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or any party in interest of a dwelling or of a building to rent or offer for rent any dwelling or building or rooming unit which is unfit for human habitation for any reason set out in this article, due to the dilapidation, leaking water lines, leaking gas lines, electrical defects increasing hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwelling or building or rooming unit unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous. Any person shall have 72 hours or three business days (in the case of office closure) after execution of said lease to rescind it by providing said notice in writing to the landlord that the dwelling or building has been discovered to be unfit as described in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 6.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-123. - Persons occupying dwellings or buildings. 
The number of persons occupying any dwelling unit, notwithstanding the definition of "dwelling unit" set forth in this article, shall be limited by the following additional requirements: The total of all habitable rooms in a dwelling or building shall be such as to provide at least 390 square feet of total building square footage (as determined and maintained in the records of the Cherokee County Tax Assessor) per each adult occupant thereof. Any floor space under a ceiling less than five feet high shall not be counted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 6.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-124. - Rooming houses. 
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall let to another for occupancy any room, unless such rooming house or room complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each rooming house and room shall be in compliance with the minimum standards set forth in section 14-121, subsections (1) through (7), and (11), and section 14-123 of this article. 
(2)  Each rooming house shall be equipped with at least one flush water closet, one lavatory, an installed tub or shower for each five persons or fraction thereof within the rooming house, including members of the family, if they are to share the use of the facilities. All such facilities shall be properly connected to the water supply and sewer system as required by section 14-121. 
(3)  Each flush water closet, lavatory, tub, or shower required above, shall be located within the rooming house, in a room, or rooms, which: 
a.  Affords privacy. 
b.  Is accessible by a common hall without going outside the rooming house. 
c.  Is accessible by a common hall without going through sleeping quarters of others. 
d.  Is not more than one story removed from the room of an occupant intended to share the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 6.4, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 14-125—14-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 14-141. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Deposit in public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any road, sidewalk, or other public place within Cherokee County, except in litter receptacles or in official county transfer stations. 
(b)  Deposit on private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within Cherokee County, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of the private property may maintain private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be reasonably prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any road, sidewalk, or other public place or onto any other private property. 
(c)  Deposit in parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within Cherokee County, except in litter receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be reasonably prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any part of the park or onto any street or other public place. 
Where litter receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this division. 
(d)  Deposit in water. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within Cherokee County. 
(e)  Throwing from vehicles. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any road, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within Cherokee County. 
(f)  Litter from vehicle. No person shall drive or move any vehicle within Cherokee County, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to reasonably prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any road or other public place or private property. 
Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any litter has fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or damage to a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public road, shall immediately cause such public road to be cleaned of all such litter or other objects and shall pay any cost thereof. 
(g)  Litter from construction sites. 
(1)  No individual or person in charge of a construction site in Cherokee County shall cause or allow any litter from the site to be deposited by the elements or otherwise upon any adjacent public or private property. During such time as the construction site is not actually being used, all litter shall be stored or deposited in containers or receptacles in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being deposited upon adjacent property by the elements or otherwise. 
(2)  No person in charge of any construction site in Cherokee County shall cause or allow any mud, dirt, sticky substance, road surfacing materials, or other litter from said construction site to be deposited by any vehicles, the wheels or tires of any vehicles, the elements, or otherwise upon any road, alley, or other public place; provided however, if a construction site and adjacent public roads and sidewalks are maintained under a cleanup program approved by the department of public works, then this subsection shall not apply. 
(h)  Sweeping into gutters. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, stormwater drain, street, or other public place within Cherokee County, an accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying any real property within the county shall keep the sidewalk in front of or adjacent to said property free of litter. 
(i)  Dropping litter or handbills from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within Cherokee County any litter, handbill, or any other object. 
(j)  Handbills; prohibited placement. 
(1)  Depositing in public. No person shall throw, deposit, or post any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, road, or other public place within Cherokee County; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the posting of commercial or noncommercial bills on posting boards designated for such purposes; and provided further, this section shall not apply to political signs or handbills as permitted. 
(2)  Placing on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle without the permission of the owner of such vehicle; provided, however, that it is not unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute a handbill without charge to the receiver thereof. 
(3)  Deposit on vacant property. No person shall throw, deposit, post, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private property which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(4)  Distribution on posted property. No person shall throw, deposit, post, or distribute any handbill upon any private property if requested by the owner or person in control of such property to refrain from doing so if there is placed on the property in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner, that the occupants of the property do not desire to have any such handbills left upon such property, in case of inhabited private property; unless requested by anyone upon such property not to do so, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private property, in such a manner as to prevent such handbill from being flown or drifted about such property or sidewalks, roads or other public places; and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations; provided further that this article shall not be construed to permit solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-142. - Property owner's duty to keep property litter-free. 
The owner, occupant or person in control of any private property or public place shall at all times maintain the property free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit: the storage of litter in private litter receptacles for collection of disposal; the maintenance of compost piles contained within a physical structure; and the temporary storage of building, construction, landscaping, and similar materials, except as prohibited expressly by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-143. - Placement in litter receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in litter receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to reasonably prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any road, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-144. - Placement in dumpsters and drop boxes; dumpster standards. 
(a)  Persons placing litter in dumpsters or drop boxes shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any road, sidewalk, or other public property or onto any other private property. 
(b)  No person shall deposit litter in any dumpster or drop box designated for the sole use by a business or multifamily residence unless that person or individual is licensed to do so by that business or multifamily residence. 
(c)  All dumpsters are to be equipped with a lid to secure the contents and to prevent the entrance of dogs or other animals. 
(d)  Lids shall remain closed at all times, unless other means of protection are provided to prevent the contents from being scattered by animals or the elements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.4, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-145. - Newspapers. 
Hand-delivered newspapers shall be placed only on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.5, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-146. - Responsibility to procure and place receptacles. 
Any person owning or operating any property, on which litter receptacles are required by this article, shall procure, place and maintain such receptacles on the property at his/her/its own expense in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.6, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-147. - Authorized litter receptacles; minimum standards. 
Litter receptacles procured and placed in public places as required by this division shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  General specifications. 
a.  The body of each litter receptacle shall be constructed of a minimum of 24-gauge galvanized steel or other material of equivalent strength that will, with normal wear and tear, reasonably resist corrosion and acts of vandalism. 
b.  All outside edges of each litter receptacle shall be rounded. 
c.  Openings in covered litter receptacles shall be readily identifiable and readily accessible for the deposit of litter. 
d.  Construction and general configuration of litter receptacles shall be in conformance with all pertinent laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations pertaining to fire, safety, public health or welfare. 
(2)  Color and marking. No commercial advertisement shall be placed on any litter receptacle. However, the person owning any receptacle may place a single line on the receptacles identifying the ownership, and a single credit line designating any donor of the litter receptacle other than the owner may also be placed on the receptacle, provided that the lettering does not exceed four inches in height. 
(3)  Maintenance. Compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this section shall include the proper upkeep, maintenance repair, or replacement of litter receptacles sufficient to permit such receptacles to serve the functions for which they were designed and to prevent the appearance of such receptacles from becoming unsightly. 
(4)  All litter receptacles are to be braced or supported in such a manner that dogs or other animals cannot enter or tip or tilt the same or empty any of the contents thereof, and each such receptacle shall have overlapping close-fitting lids designed in such a way as to remain closed when not in actual use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.7, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-148. - Receptacles; placement required. 
(a)  Litter receptacles meeting the standards established by this division shall be placed in the following public and private places in the county: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Campgrounds; 
(3)  Trailer park facilities for transient habitation; 
(4)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(5)  Gasoline service stations; 
(6)  Tavern parking lots; 
(7)  Shopping centers; 
(8)  Grocery store parking lots; 
(9)  Marinas; 
(10)  Boat launching areas; 
(11)  Boat moorage and fueling stations; 
(12)  Public and private piers; 
(13)  Beaches and bathing areas; 
(14)  Outdoor parking lots, other than those specifically designated in this section, having a capacity of more than 50 automobiles; 
(15)  Fairgrounds; 
(16)  School grounds; 
(17)  Racetracks; 
(18)  Sporting event sites; 
(19)  Sites for carnivals, festivals, circuses, shows or events of any kind to which the public is invited. 
(b)  Litter receptacles need only be placed in the places designated in subsection (a) of this section during times that such places are open to the public. 
(c)  Placement of litter receptacles shall be in conformance with laws, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations pertaining to fire, safety, public health or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.8, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-149. - Receptacle; number required. 
The minimum number of receptacles meeting the standards established by this division and required in public places listed are as follows: 
(1)  Parks, campgrounds and trailer park facilities for transient habitation: One receptacle at each public restroom facility, and one receptacle at each established trailhead giving access by foot, motorcycle, bicycle, or similar trail for excursion or exploration out or away from the central activity area. This requirement does not apply to private walking or riding trails in a subdivision or elsewhere that are not open to the general public. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations: One receptacle per gasoline pump island. 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants, tavern parking lots, shopping center, grocery store parking lots and outdoor parking lots having a capacity of 25 automobiles: One receptacle for the first 25 spaces, plus one additional receptacle for each additional 100 parking spaces. 
(4)  Marinas, boat launching areas, boating moorage, and fueling stations and public and private piers: One receptacle at each main pier, at each float and at each boat launching ramp. 
(5)  Beaches and bathing areas: One receptacle at each public restroom facility and one receptacle at each access point officially designated as such by the county. 
(6)  School grounds: One receptacle at each school ground bus loading zone. 
(7)  Sporting event sites: One litter receptacle at each entrance to the sporting event. Sporting event sites with seating capacity of more than 100 spectators: One litter receptacle at each seating area, plus an additional receptacle in each seating area for each additional 500 seats. 
(8)  Fairgrounds and sites for carnivals, festivals, circuses, shows,or events of any kind to which the public is invited: One receptacle at the entrance of each ride, and one receptacle at each end of walk-through exhibit buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.9, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-150. - Litter receptacles; prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter receptacle now owned by such person, to interfere with its proper function, or to detract from its proper appearance. 
(b)  No person shall deposit leaves, clippings, pruning or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle not owned by such person. 
(c)  No person shall deposit household garbage in any litter receptacle that is not owned by that person. This subsection shall not be construed to mean that wastes of food consumed on the property at any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles on that property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.10, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-151. - Presumption of responsibility. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this division, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), a person is presumed to be responsible for illegally depositing litter by the discovery of one or more pieces of litter within such illegally deposited litter, which are identifiable to such person by means of a name, address or other mark of identification contained on such items. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 7.11, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 14-152—14-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-176. - Unregistered and unlicensed motor vehicles. 
No person shall park or permit any other person to park any motor vehicle, except a motor vehicle parked within a carport or enclosed building, on any property in a residential district, if the vehicle: 
(1)  Is unregistered; or 
(2)  Has expired registration; or 
(3)  Does not have a lawful license plate or lawful temporary tag, which plate or tag is currently registered to that vehicle displayed thereon. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above, up to three collector cars may be stored outside if under fitted car covers of neutral color and in good condition, with no rips or holes. Such collector cars must not be parked within 20 feet of the front or rear property line or within ten feet of the side property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-177. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any property shall park any inoperable vehicle or permit any other person to park any inoperable vehicle on the owner's or occupant's property for more than 14 days, unless the inoperable vehicle is parked within a carport or enclosed structure. This section does not apply to property for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles outside an enclosed building in connection with some commercial enterprise. 
(b)  No person shall park any inoperable vehicle upon any public or private road or other public property. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, up to three collector cars may be stored outside on the owner's or occupant's property, if concealed under fitted car covers of neutral color and in good condition, with no rips or holes. Such collector cars must not be parked within 20 feet of the front or rear property line or within ten feet of the side property lines. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to an inoperable vehicle that is used for instruction at an educational institution licensed under state school laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-178. - Abandonment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the county shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-179. - Junk vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and/or keep any junk vehicle on any property adjoining or abutting any public or private road, street or other public or private property within the unincorporated portions of the county, and visible from such public or private road, street, way, or other public or private property, unless the junk vehicle is parked within a carport or enclosed structure. This section does not apply to property for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles outside an enclosed building in connection with some commercial enterprise. 
(b)  No person shall park a junk vehicle upon any private or public road or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.4, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-180. - Major overhaul. 
(a)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on property in a residential zone, unless: 
(1)  The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the property; 
(2)  The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle; and 
(3)  The work is done inside a garage or enclosed structure, or if the major overhaul of such a vehicle on property in a residential zone must be completed outside of a garage or enclosed structure, it must be completed within 30 days. 
(b)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on any property in a business, commercial or industrial district, unless the overhaul is performed at an approved licensed and properly zoned establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.5, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-181. - Recreational vehicles and school buses. 
(a)  In residential districts, recreational vehicles and school buses may be parked or stored in an enclosed garage or carport. It shall be unlawful to park recreational vehicles and school buses in the front yard of any residential district, unless such recreational vehicle and/or school bus is parked more than 20 feet from the road right-of-way, and provided that no more than a total of two recreational vehicles or two school buses, or a combination of one recreational vehicle and one school bus may be parked in the front yard. 
(b)  Additionally, in residential districts, recreational vehicles and school buses may be parked to the rear and sides of a dwelling. 
(c)  No such permitted recreational vehicle shall have attachments such as stairs, steps, handrails, porches, decks and the like. 
(d)  In residential districts, no more than a total of two recreational vehicles or two school buses, or a combination of one recreational vehicle and one school bus may be parked on a vacant and/or unimproved lot, and in such case, any such permitted vehicle may only be parked if a minimum of 20 feet from the road right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.6, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-182. - Storage of medium-duty trucks and equipment. 
(a)  On any residentially zoned property, no more than one each of the following may be stored other than in an approved enclosed garage or carport: (1) a medium-duty truck; (2) a medium-duty trailer; and/or (3) a medium-duty piece of equipment. 
(b)  Such medium-duty items must remain more than 20 feet from the public road right-of-way. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to farm equipment reasonably needed and exclusively used for agricultural operations on the property on which it is stored. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to such medium-duty trucks and equipment that are being used in construction of structures or dwellings so long as such medium-duty trucks and equipment are not stored on the property for more than 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.7, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-183. - Commercial, industrial or heavy vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park or, caused to be parked, any commercial, industrial, or heavy vehicles or equipment on residentially zoned property. On agricultural-zoned property, storage of such commercial, industrial, or heavy vehicles or equipment is limited to one each of the following: (1) truck; (2) trailer; and (3) piece of equipment. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any vehicle that is temporarily parked or left standing clearly for the purpose of loading or unloading, provided that the vision of traffic is not obstructed. 
For the purposes of this subsection, a reasonable amount of time shall be allowed for loading and unloading, the amount of which is to be determined according to the nature and extent of the loading and unloading operation. 
(c)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any vehicle or equipment that is reasonably needed and exclusively used for an approved agricultural purpose on the agricultural-zoned parcel on which it is stored, provided that such vehicles and equipment are not within 20 feet of a public road right-of-way. 
(d)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to a single roll-off bin or a single dumpster when used in conjunction with the construction, remodeling or demolition of a structure. Such use, however, must be temporary and closely correspond to the construction, remodeling or demolition schedule. Such use shall be expressly for the collection of construction debris, and at no time shall sanitary waste be dumped into said container. 
(e)  Subsection (a) does not apply to school buses, provided that the parking of school buses is done in accordance with section 14-181 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.8, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-184. - Mobile and manufactured houses. 
Mobile homes, manufactured homes, rail cars, tractor trailers, and the like shall not be utilized as an accessory storage structure, regardless of the zoning district on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 8.9, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 14-185—14-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ABATEMENT OF A NUISANCE PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-211. - Application and interest. 
This division is intended to provide additional enforcement authority to the county in accordance with the abatement of nuisance provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1, et seq. The remedies provided in division 7 are in addition to those remedies available to the county for violations of the article under section 14-34. It is intended that violations of this division shall be addressed according to section 14-34 as a general matter, and that only those properties that fail to come into compliance and which constitute a nuisance as such is defined by state law and under the terms of this division will require resort to the enforcement remedies provided in division 7. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.1, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-212. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The county intends that this division shall comport with, and be susceptible to enforcement under, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, et seq. Pursuant thereto, it is found and declared that there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this county; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of property which renders adjacent property unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent property unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(b)  Such dwellings, buildings, and property may be deemed unfit due to the following reasons; dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; properties that have an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and/or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions which create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; other conditions resulting in a violation of this article which renders such dwellings, buildings, or property unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings or buildings in which drug crimes are being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.2, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-213. - Complaint relating to unfit dwellings or structures. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the marshal by a public authority or by at least five residents of the county charging that any dwelling or building is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the marshal shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  If the marshal's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as the result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the marshal may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the actions sought by the marshal to abate the nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the magistrate court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the magistrate court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.3, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-214. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the marshal pursuant to this division shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the marshal shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by First Class Mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Cherokee County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Cherokee County at the time of filing the complaint in the magistrate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.4, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-215. - Order of the court. 
If, after notice and hearing as provided above, the magistrate court determines that the dwelling or building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use; or is vacant, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall issue an order that states in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation, and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia Appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alternation, or improvement of the structure shall be the costs necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations enforced in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.5, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-216. - Failure to comply with order of the court. 
If the owner fails to comply with an order of the court to repair, alter, improve, remove, close, or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the marshal may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The marshal shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling, building or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this dwelling, building or structure is prohibited and unlawful". 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.6, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-217. - Salvage of reusable materials. 
If the marshal has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any money shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid, according to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(6). The marshal and board of commissioners are relieved of any and all liability resulting from, or occasioned by, the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials consistent with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(6). 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.7, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-218. - Lien on property. 
(a)  The cost of repairing, altering, improving, removing, closing or demolishing the dwelling, building or structure incurred by the marshal in accordance with exercising his/her authority as described in this division 7, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Cherokee County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the list pendens notice required in this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the marshal shall transmit to the county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the marshal shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including, specifically, O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the county and the county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-80 and § 48-4-81. 
(e)  This section is intended to adopt and be consistent with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b). 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.8, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-219. - Waiver of lien. 
The county may waive and release any lien imposed on property if the owner of such property enters into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.9, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-220. - Appellate review. 
Review of the magistrate court's order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Cherokee County Superior Court according to O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.10, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 14-221. - Summary proceedings. 
Nothing in this division 7 shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise when, upon a majority vote of the board of commissioners, the county determines that a nuisance exists and the repair, alteration, improvement, removal, closing or demolition will not exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.11, 11-4-08) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-O-4, adopted Jan. 27, 1995, did not specifically repeal former art. II, §§ 18-36—18-55, which pertained to similar subject matter; hence, said ordinance has been treated as superseding the provisions of former art. II. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 18-36. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Cherokee County is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Cherokee County, Georgia; wherever the term county is used herein shall be construed to mean Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the terms: 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Cherokee County. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development of impact fees as defined by Paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-7-1-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize at least 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-37. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in Cherokee County, Georgia. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Cherokee County, whether with a location in Cherokee County or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Cherokee County. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Cherokee County, such business tax registration shall be shown to the finance department or to any county marshal of said Cherokee County, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 1, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 1, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, § exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-38. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in Cherokee County and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-17-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  In general, the number of employees of a given business is defined as the average number employed as of October 1st of the previous year. Two parttime employees would be counted as one full-time employee. The owner, if sole proprietorship or paid by salary, commission or profit, and any paid family members working for the business, will be included in this count. 
Cherokee County  1996 Occupational Tax Levied  @ $30.00 per employee based on the average number  of employees, up to a maximum of 200 employees.  There will be a maximum fee of $6,000.00 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 2, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 2, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-39. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 31st of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Cherokee County in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance department and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Cherokee County, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the magistrate judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, either or both in the discretion of the magistrate judge. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the county marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(c)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 3, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 3, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-40. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia, if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Cherokee County and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Cherokee County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving clients or customers; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and is located within the jurisdiction of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 4, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 4, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-41. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 5, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 5, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-42. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in Cherokee County. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 6, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 6, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-43. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 18-38 of this article. 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 7, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 7, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-44. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 8, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 8, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-45. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the Cherokee County registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 9, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 9, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-46. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a Cherokee County business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 10, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 10, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-47. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Cherokee County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Cherokee County, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 11, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 11, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-48. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 31st of each year, and on January 1st each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in Cherokee County after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in Cherokee County any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 18-45. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance department and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Cherokee County any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 12, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 12, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-49. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the magistrate judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days either or both, in the discretion of the magistrate judge. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 13, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 13, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-50. - Subpoena powers. 
The county marshal of Cherokee County and their duly designated officers shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1996 (this article) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 14, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 14, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-51. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to Cherokee County, at the office of the finance department, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 31st each year provided. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 15, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 15, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-52. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of Cherokee County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid in full at time of registration. Where taxpayer fails to make said payment, an additional ten percent/$250.00 penalty will be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 16, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-53. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 17, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 17, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-54. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the Finance Department of Cherokee County, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The finance department officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business and upon demand of the finance department officer, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of Cherokee County within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the Cherokee County. Adequate records shall be kept in Cherokee County, Georgia, for examination by the finance department, at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 18, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 18, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-55. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by Cherokee County under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. Checks, used to pay for the license, and returned from the bank for any reason, will result in the revocation of the license. No new business tax registration shall be granted by Cherokee County for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the finance department. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 19, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 19, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-56. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said Cherokee County after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of Cherokee County request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining accuracy, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
A business registration application or certificate under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked if the applicant or licensee has failed to pay any fee to the county, has failed to make a return or pay a tax due to the tax commissioner of the county, the county business license department, or any other agency of the county government or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of this code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 20, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 20, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2003-O-002, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 18-57. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the finance department of Cherokee County, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in Cherokee County of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the county and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the Cherokee County marshal upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of the county and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the finance department against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 21, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 21, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-58. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 22, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 22, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-59. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the finance department and the Cherokee County marshal to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the finance department and the Cherokee County marshal, and their officers to inspect all registrations issued by Cherokee County as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 23, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 23, 12-20-95; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-60. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 24, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 24, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-61. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 25, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 25, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-62. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation. 
The Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 26, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 26, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-63. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-4, § 27, 1-27-95; Ord. No. 95-O-18, § 27, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 18-64. - Fire inspection required on existing commercial facilities for business license. 
Prior to a business license being issued or occupying of an existing commercial facility, it shall be required that a fire inspection by the Cherokee County Fire Marshal's office be conducted to ensure compliance with any and all fire safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-003, 7-2-02) 
Secs. 18-65—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIALLY LICENSED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-81. - Purpose and scope of article; statutory authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, and to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of massage practitioners, peddlers and solicitors, amusement activities, pawnshops, billiard parlors, flea markets, precious metals dealers or shops, and any other business activities that from time to time may require additional police protection and regulation in order to ensure the health and safety of the community. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of 1964 Ga. Laws, page 1024, amendment to the state constitution, to 1967 Ga. Laws, page 914, amendment to the state constitution, and to 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2486. 
(c)  The provisions enumerated in article II of this chapter regarding the administration and enforcement of business license regulations apply to all special licenses in addition to the provisions enumerated in this article. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.40, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages includes but is not limited to malt beverages, vinous liquors and spirituous liquors. 
Amusement activity includes any fair, concert, carnival or sideshow and those activities, rides and games normally associated with such amusements wherein the general public is allowed to view or participate for a price. 
Billiard room means any public place with two or more tables on which the game of billiards is permitted to be played. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket billiards and English billiards. The term shall apply to all tables, both coin-operated and non-coin-operated. 
Licensee means any person holding a license issued under this article. 
Massage means manipulation of the human body's soft tissue through manual, mechanical or electrical means or similar treatment to the human trunk or limbs. 
Massage practitioner includes but is not limited to masseurs, masseuses and massage therapists, and includes any person who manipulates the body's soft tissue through manual, mechanical or electrical massage or similar treatment to the human trunk or limbs. It shall not include any person who diagnoses or performs a service who holds an unlimited license to practice medicine, surgery, chiropractic or podiatry, or an employee, or an athletic trainer, technician or physical therapist who acts under the prescription or supervision of a medical doctor, chiropractor or podiatrist. 
Pawn and pledge mean bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a well-defined part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pool room. See "Billiard room." 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.91, 2-28-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-83. - Approval of board of commissioners required for certain licenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or profession or practice the business, trade or profession of an amusement activity, pawnshop, pool room or massage practitioner before obtaining approval for a license by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.90(a), 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-84. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
(a)  All licenses to engage in the business of an amusement activity, pawnshop, pool room or massage practitioner shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and any other ordinance, resolution or law of the county, state or United States relating to such business. 
(b)  All applicants for licenses specified in this section shall be required to sign an acknowledgment that they have received, read and understood the provisions of this article prior to issuance of the license. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.90(b), (c), 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-85. - Application for license; issuance of license; license period. 
(a)  Applications for a license to engage in the business of an amusement activity, pawnshop, pool room or massage practitioner shall be filed with the business license department on forms as prescribed by the county, and shall meet the standards and specifications enumerated in this article. 
(b)  When all the necessary investigations, including those to be made by the county marshal, are completed, the business license department shall transmit the application to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall grant the license if the application and the applicant meet all the requirements of this article. If approved by the board, the business license department shall issue the license. Unless otherwise provided, the license shall be valid for one year from the date that the license is initially approved and issued. 
(c)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.92(a)—(c), 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-86. - Renewal of license for pawnshop, pool room or massage practitioner. 
All licenses for pawnshops, pool rooms and massage practitioners shall be renewed with the business license office prior to the anniversary of the date that the initial business license was obtained. All pawnshops, pool rooms and massage practitioners that currently possess a business license at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall renew their business license on or before the expiration date of their current license, and those businesses shall subsequently renew their license prior to the anniversary of the expiration date of their current license. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.92(d), 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-87. - Criteria for granting of license. 
(a)  No application for any license for amusement activities, massage practitioners, pawnshops and pool rooms shall be granted where the application, or the evidence on a hearing before the board of commissioners, shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license for the business or business activity for which he now seeks a license, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance pertaining to such business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has committed any of the acts enumerated in section 18-54 which constitutes due cause for denial of a license. 
(b)  In addition to the conditions listed in subsection (a) of this section, in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect the business would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of and the place for which the license is sought. 
(4)  Whether the applicant's spouse is able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.93, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-88. - License fee. 
The fees for licenses for amusement activities, pawnshops, pool rooms and massage practitioners shall be as established by the board of commissioners, and shall be available as part of the schedule of fees in the business license department. The board of commissioners may amend or revise these fees from time to time. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.94, 2-28-92) 
Secs. 18-89—18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchants Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who purchases or otherwise acquires within or without the county any goods, wares, merchandise, produce or other things of value and goes about from place to place within the county selling or offering for sale any of such things to either merchants or customers. 
Solicitor means any person who solicits orders on behalf of a firm, corporation, company, association, partnership or individual for any goods, wares or merchandise or other things of value, from house to house. Any person who obtains orders for merchandise or other things of value shall be deemed a solicitor. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.70, 2-28-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-112. - Peddlers to be licensed. 
Every peddler shall be required to obtain a license. All licenses to peddle shall be paid for at the price fixed by article II of this chapter, or otherwise. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.71, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-113. - Conduct of business by peddlers. 
(a)  No trader or peddler shall offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a permit from the license bureau of the county. 
(b)  Peddlers shall conduct business from locations zoned GC only. 
(c)  Peddlers shall maintain all merchandise on a vehicle. The peddler's business license shall be void if the peddler does not have in his possession at the location a business license and a written notarized affidavit from the property owner authorizing the peddler to be engaged in business at the property owner's location. 
(d)  Any violations of the provisions of this division pertaining to peddlers shall subject the license to revocation. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.72, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-114. - Solicitor's permit. 
(a)  Permit required; applicability of division. 
(1)  Resident solicitors. A resident solicitor shall obtain a solicitor's permit and be subject to all rules and regulations of this division. 
(2)  Nonresident solicitors. Any solicitor who solicits orders as described in this division and whose employer does not maintain a place for doing business in the county so as to be subject to the government, rules and regulations of this chapter shall be deemed a nonresident solicitor and shall comply with the regulations of this division. 
(3)  Persons holding business license. Any applicant who has paid a business license fee or tax shall receive a credit of the amount so paid toward the payment of the solicitor's registration and permit fee. However, such applicant shall in all manners and all respects be subject to all other provisions of this division. 
(b)  Application; investigation of applicant; grounds for denial. 
(1)  No solicitor shall be authorized to solicit orders until he files an application with the license bureau and obtains a permit and registers as a solicitor. The license bureau shall make an investigation, including but not limited to an investigation of the criminal record and moral character of the applicant. The license bureau shall furnish the county marshal a duplicate of the application for the solicitor's permit. The county marshal, within ten days, shall furnish a report to the license bureau of the criminal record, if any, of the applicant. No permit shall be given to any applicant who shall have either a pending charge or a conviction for a crime of moral turpitude or an offense involving the elements of assault and battery, or any civil judgment involving unethical and improper business actions, including but not limited to actions which would constitute fraud and deceit under the laws of the state. 
(2)  No application for a permit under this section shall be received or acted upon if the applicant has submitted the same or a similar application for a permit within the preceding 12 months, which prior application has been dismissed, denied or abandoned. No permit shall be granted if the applicant is in violation of this division or has, within 12 months preceding the application, been in violation of this division or any other law or ordinance regulating the activities for which such permit is sought. 
(c)  Fee. The applicant for a solicitor's permit shall pay a fee as set out in the schedule of fees, as cost for investigation and regulation under this division. This fee shall be used for payment of the cost of such registration, investigation and regulation of persons subject to this division. 
(d)  Term; renewal. A permit issued under this division shall be valid for 90 days from the date the permit is issued. The permit may be renewed by filing a renewal application with the business license office upon forms prescribed by the office, and paying a renewal fee as set out in the schedule of fees, to cover the expense of updating the investigative report. 
(e)  House-to-house solicitation. All solicitors, both nonresident and resident, who solicit orders from house to house shall first obtain a permit for such solicitation from the supervisor of the license office. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.73—1.77, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-115. - Badge for solicitors. 
All solicitors shall wear a badge, the design of which shall be in the discretion of the license office, but which shall be uniform as to all solicitors. The badge shall provide the following information: the name of the solicitor, the name of the company, and an identification number, in large enough type to be read and seen by persons with normal vision at a distance of ten feet. At all times, the solicitor shall wear on either the left or right shoulder of his garment the badge prescribed by the license office, so that such badge can be readily seen by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.78, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-116. - Conduct of business by solicitors; information to be provided to customers. 
(a)  Information card required; contents. The supervisor of the license office shall provide to each solicitor an information card, and the solicitor shall present this card to each household he visits. It is the responsibility of the solicitor to make sufficient copies of the information card to furnish a copy to each household he visits. Such card shall contain such information as required by the business license supervisor. The following statements may appear on the information card: 
The solicitor is not to enter your home except at your express invitation. 
You have the right to refuse entry or to ask the solicitor to leave the premises, and if he/she should fail to leave the premises after your instructions, he/she shall be in violation of the laws of this state and/or ordinances of Cherokee County. 
Report any discourteous conduct to the Business License Office of Cherokee County. 
In the event you purchase the product of the solicitor, you have the right to cancel a Home Solicitation Service Agreement any time until midnight on the business day after the day on which you sign the agreement, provided you give notice of the cancellation to the seller at the place of business as set forth in the agreement or by Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested, which shall be posted not later than midnight on the day following execution of your agreement. 
A solicitor shall place his/her name and permit number in the blank provided on the card and shall present it to the occupant of each home that he visits. 
(b)  Failure to present information card. It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to fail to present the card to the resident or occupant of a home at which the solicitor solicits business. 
(c)  Announcement to occupant. At each house, the solicitor shall announce to the owner or occupant of the home his name and that he has been issued a permit by the county license bureau as a home solicitor, and shall announce the purpose of his call and present the card provided for by this section and shall allow time for the occupant or owner to read the card. 
(d)  Entry on private property. No solicitor shall enter a home without the express invitation of the occupant or owner. If a "no soliciting" sign is posted, no soliciting shall be made. 
(e)  Courteous conduct required; compliance with request to leave premises. A solicitor shall at all times maintain a courteous decorum and shall not use opprobrious, vulgar or slang words to any homeowner or occupant. No solicitor shall remain upon the premises of an occupant or owner after such occupant or owner has requested the solicitor to leave or indicated that he is not interested in purchasing the solicitor's product. 
(f)  Misrepresentation of effect of permit. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to represent by word, action or deed that the issuance of a permit by the county license bureau in any way represents approval or condonation of either the actions of the solicitor or his product. 
(g)  Information to be provided to persons placing orders. If a solicitor secures an order from an owner or occupant, the solicitor shall inform the owner or occupant as to his rights under the home solicitation act of the state. This may be done by the solicitor leaving a written card or document specifying the rights of a homeowner or occupant under the Retail Installment and Home Solicitation Sales Act. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.79—1.85, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-117. - County records of solicitors; complaints against solicitors. 
(a)  The business license department shall maintain true and accurate records of the name and identification number of each solicitor, together with other information required by this division, and shall maintain a log of all complaints for each solicitor or organization represented by solicitors. 
(b)  If the license office receives any ordinance violation complaints concerning a particular solicitor, or three violation complaints concerning an organization, the business license office shall notify the solicitor and the organization the solicitor represents of the complaints, and the business license department may suspend the permit until such time as the solicitor or organization can show cause that he or it is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this division. 
(c)  The business license department shall maintain a true and accurate log of each complaint, showing the name of the complainant and the substance of the complaint. Such records shall be available to the solicitor or his company or organization, and shall be deemed a public record. A hearing shall be set before the supervisor of the license office within five business days after notification of the solicitor, at which time the license office shall investigate the nature of the complaints and the solicitor may use witnesses or other evidence to show his compliance with this chapter. If the supervisor of the license office determines that the solicitor has violated the ordinances of the county, he shall revoke the permit of the solicitor. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.86, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-118. - Appeals by solicitors. 
(a)  A solicitor shall have the right to file an appeal from the ruling of the business license department under this division to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  If any solicitor or his company is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of commissioners, he shall have the right to appeal as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.87, 1.88, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-119. - Charitable solicitors, religious solicitors and evangelists. 
(a)  Registration required. No person may conduct charitable solicitation or religious evangelism or solicitation on a door-to-door basis in any residential area unless he has registered as a charitable solicitor or as a colporteur, solicitor or evangelist with the county license bureau. 
(b)  Hours of operation. No person may conduct charitable solicitation or religious evangelism or solicitation on a door-to-door basis in any residential area except during the period from 9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(c)  Badge. Any person conducting charitable solicitation or religious evangelism or solicitation on a door-to-door basis in any residential area shall wear a badge on either the left or right shoulder printed in type normally visible from a distance of ten feet, which badge must contain the following information: 
(1)  The person's name; and 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the organization he represents. 
(d)  Information to be provided to license bureau. Each person registering with the county business license department as a charitable solicitor or as a religious colporteur, solicitor or evangelist shall give the following information to the license bureau: 
(1)  His full name. 
(2)  His residence address. 
(3)  His residence phone number. 
(4)  His social security number. 
(5)  The name, local address and phone number of the organization the individual represents. 
(e)  Registration fee. Each individual registering under this section shall pay to the business license department a fee as shown on the schedule of fees in the business license department. Such fee is not a revenue-raising measure, but is intended only to cover the cost to the county of registration. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.89, 2-28-92) 
Secs. 18-120—18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL EVENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, adopted Oct. 4, 2011, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 18-141—18-145, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.100—1.108, adopted Feb. 28, 1992. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c). 

Sec. 18-141. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of the section to provide for the issuance of special event permits to regulate events on the public streets and public/private property of unincorporated Cherokee County in the interest of public health, safety and welfare; and to provide for fees, charges and procedures require to administer the process. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-142. - Definition of a special event. 
(a)  A special event shall include but not be limited to, block parties, trade shows, festivals, fairs, fun runs, roadway foot races, fundraising walk, auction, bikeathons, parades, carnivals, filming/movie events, concerts, motorcycle rides, and which event is to be held: 
(1)  Wholly or partially on property owned or maintained by the county; 
(2)  On a street or sidewalk located within the county and will likely result in the obstruction of such streets or sidewalks or will likely compromise the ability of the county to respond to a public safety emergency; or 
(3)  On any other property, but requires for its successful execution the provision and the coordination of the county services to a degree over and above that which the county routinely provides. 
(b)  The definition of special event is not intended to include; 
(1)  An activity held solely on private property and which does not otherwise require for its successful execution the provision and coordination of the county services to a degree equal to and/or over and above that which the county routinely provides; 
(2)  Programmed activities provided or managed by the county, i.e. recreational and senior center programs; 
(3)  Any event that would otherwise fall within the definition of a special event held in a city park and does not interfere with the regular use of the park by the general public. 
(4)  First Amendment activity on county streets or sidewalks (including those in parks) that will not likely result in the obstruction of the county streets or sidewalks nor compromise the ability of the county to respond to a public safety emergency; or 
(5)  Permitting of sports fields, sports facilities or park shelters, recreation or senior centers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-143. - Permit requirement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, partnership, association, corporation, or any other type of business entity to act as a promoter of a special event without first obtaining a special event permit. Examples of special events include, but are not limited to, block parties, trade shows, festivals, fairs, fun runs, roadway foot races, fundraising walk, auction, bikeathons, parades, carnivals, filming/movie events, concerts, motorcycle rides. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-144. - Terms of permit. 
Each permit issued under this division shall be limited to the number of days approved for operation of the special event for which the permit was issued, not to exceed 21 days. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-145. - Permit application. 
A special events permit must be obtained from Cherokee County. Such application shall state: 
(a)  Name and address of applicant/sponsor. 
(b)  The nature of the activity to be carried on. 
(c)  Location/route, date and time. 
(d)  If partnership, list partners names. 
(e)  If corporation, list of officers. 
The application shall further include the general plan and layout of how the area concerned is to be used, including plans for parking facilities, sanitation plan and emergency plan. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-146. - Decisions. 
In deciding whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny a permit/license, the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, county manager, or his or her designee, shall determine whether: 
(a)  The event, as proposed, can be shown to function safely; 
(b)  The diversion of police and fire resources to support the event will not deny reasonable police and fire protection to the county; 
(c)  The special event will not cause irreconcilable interference with previously approved and/or scheduled construction, maintenance or other activities; 
(d)  The special event sponsor/applicant provides transportation management/parking plan for traffic control/parking management which may include accommodating transportation demand management measures; 
(e)  The location/route meets the criteria established in the procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-147. - Conditions authorized and additional permits. 
Cherokee County may include in a special event permit, among other provision, reasonable terms or conditions as to the time, place and manner of the event; compliance with health and sanitary regulations, emergency services, and security. Additional permits may be required to meet the condition established by the permit, and/or other county codes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-148. - Insurance. 
A certificate of insurance is to be provided to Cherokee County no less than 14 days prior to the scheduled event. If an event is approved it will be approved pending receipt of the insurance certificate. The insurance agency must be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. In the event of cancellation or any changes to the policy, Cherokee County must be notified by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-149. - Alcohol. 
Alcohol sales and consumption is permitted only with consent from the marshal's office in accordance with the county's alcoholic beverage ordinance. All required licensing and insurance pertaining to the serving of alcohol must be obtained by the sponsor/applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-150. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Permit fees are based on a flat fee schedule. 
(b)  Application fee. To cover administration fees (non-refundable). 
(c)  Additional fees may incur. Fees associated with permit conditions (i.e. electrical, security, fire marshal, fire emergency services, building permit, etc.) are in addition to the above fees mentioned and are the sole responsibility of the applicant/sponsor. 
(d)  Fees assessed are payable at the time of application. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may amend or revise these fees from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-151. - Administration. 
The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, county manager, or his or her designee, shall have the power, and it shall be his/her duty, from time to time, to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations consistent with this division for the purpose of carrying out the provision hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-152. - Disturbing the peace; improper entertainment or conduct. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 18-153. - Penalties. 
Failure to obtain a special event permit will result in violation of the provisions stated herein and will be subject upon conviction before the magistrate judge, to a fine of no more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, at the discretion of the magistrate judge. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to close any event immediately upon violation of conditions set forth herein or to preserve safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-008, Exh. A, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 18-154—18-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-005, adopted Apr. 19, 2011, repealed Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 18-166—18-177, which pertained to pawnshops and derived from Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.120, 1.125—1.134, adopted Feb. 28, 1992. 

Secs. 18-166—18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - POOL ROOMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 18-201. - Applicability of division; statutory authority. 
The rules and regulations set forth in this division shall govern the operation of all pool rooms and billiard halls in the unincorporated area of the county. O.C.G.A. §§ 43-8-1—43-8-18 shall not apply in the unincorporated areas of the county. The provisions in this division are adopted under the home rule provisions of article 9, section III, paragraph I et seq., of the state constitution. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.135, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-202. - Exemptions from division. 
This division shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.148, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-203. - Application for license; issuance of license. 
(a)  Application. All persons 18 years of age or older desiring to obtain a license required for the operation of a pool room shall make written application at the business license department. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  The nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(4)  If a partnership, the names of the partners; 
(5)  If a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the director of the business license department or the county marshal 
The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or an agent thereof. 
(b)  Investigation of applicant. 
(1)  All applicants shall be investigated by the county marshal, and a report made to the business license department, before the hearing by the board of commissioners. This requirement shall be waived if a current investigation report is on file. For purposes of this subsection, the term "current" means having been made within the past six months. 
(2)  The reports shall be sent to the business license department to be placed in the applicant's file. 
(c)  Grounds for denial. 
(1)  No license shall be issued to any person having an interest, directly or indirectly, either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, who has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere within the past five years immediately prior to filing of the application, for any felony of any state or of the United States. The term "conviction," as used in this section, shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(2)  No license shall be issued where there is evidence that the granting of such license will have an adverse effect on the community. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.136—1.138, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-204. - Transfer of license. 
A license for the operation of a pool room shall not be transferable except by application to the business license department in the same form and manner as an original application. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.144, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-205. - Suspension or revocation of license; violations. 
(a)  Commission of any of the following acts by a licensee under this division, or his agent or employee, shall be a violation of law and shall be grounds for revocation of a billiard room license: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to permit the use of any drug in any form in or around a place of business. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling or betting in the place of business or on the premises. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to permit or commit any violation of a state law or county ordinance. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in or for any other purpose to enter or remain in a billiard room during hours and times when alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed or dispensed therein. This subsection shall not apply to persons under 18 years of age who are accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal. Any person desiring admission thereto during hours and times when alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed or dispensed, who is or appears to be under the age of 18 years, shall produce a satisfactory identification and age verification or certify his age in writing or produce a written permit before he shall be allowed entry. 
(b)  In addition to revocation or suspension of a license for the reasons otherwise specified in this division, the license to operate a billiard room or parlor may be suspended or revoked for violation of any of the following standards: 
(1)  If the licensee permits public drunkenness and disorderly conduct among his patrons or employees after warning by the county officer, such failure to act shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(2)  If the licensee receives notice from police or county officials of any violations of any ordinance other than as provided in subsection (1) of this subsection, without correction thereof, such failure to act shall be grounds for automatic revocation. 
(3)  In the event of violation of state or federal laws by the licensee or his agents or servants on the premises, such violations shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(4)  In the event of conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude by the licensee off the premises, such conviction shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.143, 1.149, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-206. - Inspections; revocation of state license or permit. 
It shall be the duty of the county marshal or other constituted authorities to inspect all public billiard rooms in the county for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this division are being observed; and it shall be their duty to report all violations promptly to the appropriate prosecuting attorney of the county and furnish him with such information and assistance as is necessary for the prosecution of such violations. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license held by the licensee, the license issued under this division shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.147, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-207. - Location; parking facilities. 
The place of business of a pool room or billiard hall shall be zoned for PUD (planned shopping center), NB (neighborhood shopping center) or GC (general commercial), and shall have adequate parking facilities so that parking of the applicant's customers shall not be upon the streets, roads, rights-of-way or sidewalks of the county. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.139, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-208. - Restrooms; sanitation generally. 
The place of business of a pool room or billiard hall shall have restrooms for males and females. Such restrooms must be kept clean, and the premises shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the health department or other departments of the county. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.140, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-209. - Health certificate required for premises serving food. 
If food is served at a pool room or billiard hall, the applicant shall have a valid health certificate issued by the county health department before any license can be issued under this division. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.141, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-210. - Hours of operation. 
Licensees for the operation of a billiard room shall be permitted to engage in such activities between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.142, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-211. - Gambling; alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No dice, cards, dominoes or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or in any other business place operated in connection therewith, and such games as Kelly pool, keno, pigeon pool, star pool, scrub and similar gambling devices are prohibited. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such place of business. The use of baseball tickets and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited in billiard rooms or in any place operated in connection therewith. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or allowed to be used in or on the premises of billiard rooms or any place operated in connection therewith, except that this prohibition shall not apply if such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.145, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-212. - Connection with premises where illegal activity is conducted. 
It shall be unlawful for any billiard room to maintain connections with any place where gambling or any other illegal activity is conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation or delivery of or other dealing in alcoholic beverages, or for any immoral purpose. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.146, 2-28-92) 
Secs. 18-213—18-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Deceptive trade practices with respect to health spas, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-392 et seq.; giving of massages in place used for lewdness, prostitution or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; Georgia Physical Therapy Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-33-1 et seq.; levy of occupational tax on practitioners of massage and physiotherapy only at place of principal office, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 

Sec. 18-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage establishment. 
Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided, or some third person on his behalf, will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor. 
Massage establishment means any commercial establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage, and which has a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as massage. 
Massagist, masseur and masseuse mean any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage. 
Outcall massage service means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment. 
Patron means any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Permittee means the person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the capacity of a massagist. 
Recognized school means any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or any school recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc., and which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 500 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
Sexual or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.151, 2-28-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-237. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this division, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner or operator, or whether acting as a mere agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, directly or indirectly, who gives massages or operates a massage establishment or any of the services defined in this division without first obtaining a license or permit and paying a fee to do so from the business license department, or who violates any provision of this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.152, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-238. - Exemptions from division. 
This division shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state; 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state; 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes; 
(4)  Massage therapists who have a diploma or certificate from a recognized school. Further, in order to be exempt under this division, a massage therapist must provide a certified statement from the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work showing that the applicant has passed the certification examination, which is administered by the board (NCBTMB). 
However, a background investigation fee of all new applicants shall be required in the amount of $100.00. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.153, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2000-O-3, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2000-O-12, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 18-239. - License required; location of business. 
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business license issued by the county pursuant to the provisions of this division for each separate office or place of business conducted by that person. No license shall be issued for such office or place of business except in a C-2 zone as defined under chapter 70 pertaining to zoning. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.162(a), 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-240. - Massagist's permit required. 
No person shall practice massage as a massagist or employee or otherwise unless he has a valid and subsisting massagist's permit issued to him by the county pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.162(b), 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-241. - Employment of massagists not holding valid permit prohibited. 
No person shall employ any person as a massagist unless the employee has obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.163, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-242. - Application for license; investigation of applicant. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the county upon a form provided by the county marshal and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee. Copies of the application shall, within five days, be referred to the chief building official, the county fire department and the county marshal's office. These departments shall, within 30 days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the county marshal concerning compliance with the codes of the county that they administer. The county marshal, shall also make an investigation of the applicant's character and qualifications. Each application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents. All provisions in this section which refer to an applicant also include an applicant that is a corporation or a partnership. 
(1)  A definition of the service to be provided. 
(2)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers of the premises where the business is to be conducted. 
(3)  The name and residence address of each applicant, including the following: 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and residence address of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. 
(4)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant, including the addresses of stockholders and partners if applicable. 
(5)  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age, including proof of age of stockholders and partners if applicable. 
(6)  The individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex. 
(7)  A copy of some form of identification for the applicant, such as a driver's license or Social Security card, including identification for stockholders and partners if applicable. 
(8)  One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size, and a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken by the sheriff or his agent. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include one portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches in size of all officers and managing agents of the corporation, and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints, which shall be taken by the sheriff or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall include one front-face portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches in size of each partner, including any limited partner in the partnership, and a complete set of fingerprints for each partner or limited partner, which shall be taken by the county marshal or his agent. 
(9)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application, including information for stockholders and partners if applicable. 
(10)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; and whether such person, in previously operating in this or another county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(11)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the date of conviction, the nature of the crime and the place convicted. 
(12)  The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in the establishment. 
(13)  A diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that, if the applicant will not himself engage in the practice of massage, he need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning where the method, profession and work of massage is taught. 
(14)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given under subsection (3) of this subsection wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on. 
(15)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(16)  Authorization for the county and its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(17)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the county, then the state, and lastly the rest of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(18)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
Upon completion of the application form and the furnishing of all information required by this section, the county marshal, or their designee, shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. 
(b)  The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the county marshal, or their designee, of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such change occurs. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.164, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-243. - Application for massagist's permit. 
(a)  An application for a massagist's permit shall be made to the business license department in the same manner as provided in this division for massage establishment licenses. The application shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The business address and all telephone numbers of the premises where the massage is to be practiced. 
(2)  The name and residence address and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known, including the two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant's social security number, driver's license number, if any, and date of birth. 
(4)  The applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex. 
(5)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(6)  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance, except misdemeanor traffic violations. 
(7)  Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the marshal, sheriff's office, or designee. 
(8)  Two front-face portrait photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(9)  The name and address of the recognized school attended by the applicant, the dates attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing that the applicant has completed not less than 70 hours of instruction. 
(10)  The massage or similar business history and experience of the applicant for ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person, in previously operating in this or another county or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(11)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least five bona fide permanent residents of the United States, other than relatives, that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the county, then the state, and lastly the rest of the United States. 
(12)  Authorization for the county and its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(13)  A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, in which he swears that the information contained in the application is true and correct. Such declaration shall be duly dated and signed in the county. 
(14)  A medical certificate signed by a physician licensed to practice in the state, issued within seven days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense. 
(15)  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the county marshal in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(b)  The county shall waive the requirements of subsection (a)(9) of this section if the applicant furnishes satisfactory evidence that he attended not less than 70 hours of instruction in a school within the United States that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this division. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.165, 1.168, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-244. - Grounds for denial of license or permit. 
The business license department, after confirming that all requirements for a massage establishment or massagist described in this division have been met, will recommend issuance of a license or permit unless it finds that: 
(1)  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the county, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the county's building, zoning and health regulations; 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien of any nature upon the business or the equipment used therein, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted one of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
a.  An offense involving the use of or threat of force and violence upon the person of another; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct; or 
c.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons. 
The county may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subsection a., b. or c. of this subsection if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for the crimes mentioned in this subsection; 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the license or permit application or in any document required by the county in conjunction therewith; 
(5)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur's or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the county or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application; or 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of 18 years. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.165, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-245. - Minimum facilities for massage establishments; compliance with building codes. 
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the county reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steambaths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials, and such facilities shall be installed in accordance with the county building code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the county plumbing code. 
a.  Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the chief building official. 
b.  Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, except that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains. 
c.  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning. 
(2)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(3)  Separate storage areas shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linen, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, and such containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(4)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilet facilities shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(5)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(6)  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the county electrical code. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.167, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-246. - Time limit for approval or denial of license or permit; expiration of license or permit. 
(a)  The business license department shall act to approve or deny an application for a license or permit under this division within a reasonable period of time, and in no event shall the county act to approve or deny the license or permit later than 90 days from the date that the application was accepted by the business license department. 
(b)  Every license or permit issued pursuant to this division will terminate on January 1 of each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.169, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-247. - Issuance of license. 
Upon the payment of the fee for professionals provided in article II of this chapter for each massagist in the establishment, the business license department shall issue the license for the massage establishment. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.170, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-248. - License for multiple massage establishments. 
Should any massage business have more than one location where the business of massage is pursued, then a license stating both the address of the principal place of business and the addresses of the other locations shall be issued by the county marshal upon the tender of the license fees. Licenses issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as the expiration date of the license of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.171, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-249. - Posting of license and permit. 
(a)  Every massagist shall post the permit required by this division in his work area. 
(b)  Every person licensed under this division to operate a massage establishment shall display such license in a prominent place. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.172, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-250. - Massage establishments to be operated under name and at location specified in license. 
No person granted a license pursuant to this division shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or at any location not specified in his license. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.173, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-251. - Transfer of license or permit. 
(a)  No license or permit issued under this division shall be transferable except with the consent of the board of commissioners. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by any applicable fees. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as required in this division for an initial application for a license or permit. 
(b)  Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that, upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased licensee may continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.174, 1.175, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-252. - Revocation or suspension of license or permit. 
(a)  Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the county marshal after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this division are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct which violates any state or local laws or ordinances, including but not limited to health, sanitation and safety requirements, at the licensee's place of business, when the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of such violation by due diligence. 
(b)  A massagist's permit issued by the business license department shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this division. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.176, 1.177, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-253. - Inspection of massage establishments. 
The county marshal or his authorized representatives shall and the sheriff may, from time to time, make inspections during regular business hours of each massage business establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this division are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or licensee under this division to fail to allow the inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.154, 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-254. - Register of employees. 
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as masseurs or masseuses, and their permit numbers. The register shall be available at the massage establishment to representatives of the county during regular business hours. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.155, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-255. - Operation of massage establishments. 
(a)  Sanitation generally. Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Posting of prices. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)  Clothing of employees; employee dressing rooms. All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment, covering the sexual and genital areas. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises, with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing room shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(d)  Sheets and towels. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity, which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(e)  Deceptive advertising. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this division shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(f)  Minors. No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron, unless that person is on the premises on lawful business or with a doctor's written request. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(h)  Hours. No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Res. No. 92-17, §§ 1.156—1.159, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 18-256. - Doors and view into rooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or other area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings within a massage establishment shall have an unobstructed opening six inches by six inches in size capable of providing clear two-way viewing into and out of all cubicles, rooms or booths. The opening shall be not less than 4½ feet from the floor of the establishment and not more than 5½ feet from the floor. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall have no such opening on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statutes or ordinances concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude authorized inspection thereof whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by law enforcement or the health department. (Res. No. 92-17, § 1.160(e), 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-257. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit under this division to treat a person of the opposite sex, except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments to be administered. The date and hour of each treatment given, and the name of the operator, shall be entered on the order by the establishment where such treatments are given, and shall be subject to inspection by the county marshal, pursuant to section 18-253. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a patient, in the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, registered physical therapist or chiropractor, or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital area of any person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor any agent, employee or other person under his control or supervision to perform the acts prohibited in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.160(a)—(c), 2-28-92; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 18-258. - Outcall massage service. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee under this division to participate in an outcall massage service. Such person shall administer massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such business under this division. Any violation of this subsection shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted under this division. The restriction on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage upon a customer or client who, because of reasons of physical defects or incapacities or due to illness, is physically unable to travel to the massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering such treatment, and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of the physical defect, incapacity or illness of the client or customer, shall be kept by the licensee or a person or employee designated by the licensee. Such records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of this division. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by an employee of the business or the city shall be unlawful. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.160(d), 2-28-92) 
Secs. 18-259—18-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, adopted May 17, 2011, repealed Art. III, Div. 7, § 18-281, which pertained to precious metals dealers and derived from Ord. No. 92-17, § 1.178, adopted Feb. 28, 1992. Similar provisions can now be found in Ch. 38, Art. V. 

Secs. 18-281—18-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-003, §§ I—XVII, adopted May 18, 2010, amended Div. 8, to read as set out herein. Former Div. 8, §§ 18-301—18-332, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-2, §§ 1.1—1.32, adopted June 8, 1993. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; zoning, ch. 70. 

Sec. 18-301. - Findings of the board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners finds, based on a 1984 study entitled Adult Entertainment Business in Indianapolis, that areas with sexually oriented businesses have higher crime rates than similar areas with no sexually oriented business. Specifically, the board finds that the study reveals that sex-related crimes, defined in the study as rape, indecent exposure, obscene conduct, child molestation, adult molestation, and commercial sex, are much more prevalent in areas where adult entertainment is offered than in areas where no adult entertainment is offered. The same finding is true as to the occurrences of major crimes. 
The board of commissioners further finds, based on a May 19, 1986, study from Austin, Texas, entitled Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in Austin, that a severe decline in residential property values may be precipitated by the presence of an adult entertainment establishment, particularly where that adult entertainment establishment is located within one block of residential property uses. Furthermore, the board finds that there is an indication that the introduction of adult entertainment establishments into areas of family-oriented, owner-occupied residential neighborhoods may precipitate a transition to a more transient, renter-occupied neighborhood, which leads to depressed property values and urban blight. 
The board of commissioners further finds, based on an October 1980 study of the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime and Housing Values, that adult businesses do have a significant and consistent positive correlation with the crime rate index and a negative correlation with the mean single-family housing value. The board of commissioners also finds, based on this study, that adult entertainment businesses should be permitted only in locations that are at least 750 feet, from residential areas and that adult entertainment businesses should not be placed adjacent to one another. The board of commissioners further finds, based on a June 1978 study from St. Paul, Minnesota, entitled Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul, that the presence of adult entertainment establishments correlates statistically with poor neighborhood conditions. The board finds, based on this study that the location of adult entertainment establishments correlates significantly with neighborhood blight and deterioration. 
The board of commissioners further finds, based on a May 25, 1979, study from Phoenix, Arizona, that examined crime statistics and compared areas that have sexually oriented businesses with those that do not, reveals a marked increase in sex offenses in neighborhoods with sexually oriented business, and increases in property and violent crimes, as well. 
The board of commissioners further finds, based on a June 1987 study prepared by the Manatee County Planning and Development Department, Manatee County, Florida, which considered research from over 15 cities and counties throughout the United States, conducted between 1977 and 1987, that adult entertainment businesses have a deleterious effect upon property value, particularly residential property, and that sex-related crimes were substantially higher in study areas with adult entertainment establishments compared to control areas without such businesses. 
As such, based upon the aforementioned studies, as well as other reports concerning secondary impacts and effects of adult entertainment establishments and sex oriented businesses, including reports entitled, Summaries of Key Reports Concerning the Negative Secondary Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses, Report To: The American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses and Preventing the Secondary Effects of Adult Entertainment Establishments: Is Zoning the Solution?, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, leads to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions, blight and diminution in property values. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described hereinabove. The board of commissioners finds that it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the county, as well. 
It is also the finding of the board of commissioners that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theatres and adult motion picture arcades have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. The board finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the community are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing, shows adult motion pictures, or sells video tapes depicting sexual activities. 
Furthermore, based upon oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel and experts in the field of real property valuation, all of whom are familiar with the secondary conditions resulting in other localities, at the board of commissioner's public hearing on May 18, 2010, the board takes note of the detrimental secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality on the surrounding community, which the board finds do not vary greatly among the various communities within our state and country. 
The board of commissioners therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the board finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The board finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § I, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-302. - Purpose and intent of article. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to regulate the location and operation of adult entertainment establishments as defined herein. This article is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize adverse impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments. The board of commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia, finds that restricting adult entertainment establishments to commercial and industrial zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate such establishments by delineating zones where adult entertainment establishments are most compatible with other uses and the surrounding neighborhood. The board also finds that requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult entertainment establishment uses and other uses will afford the most protection to residential uses. It is not the intent or purpose of the board of commissioners, in enacting this article, to deny any person's right to speech, conduct or expression protected by the Untied States or Georgia Constitutions. In the enactment of this article, the board intends to adopt a content neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § II, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-303. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which 25 or more square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book, magazine, periodical or publication, film, video, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, or which derives 20 percent or more of the establishment's revenue from the sale or rental of books, magazines, publications, films, videos, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a segment or section comprising of 25 or more square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of books, magazines, periodicals or publications, films, videos, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, or which derives 20 percent or more of its revenue from the same or rental of books, magazines, periodicals or publications, films, videos, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, adult motel, or sexual device shop, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities," as defined herein, in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
(8)  Any business or commercial establishment where any worker engages in the physical manipulation, washing, scrubbing, stroking or touching, for commercial or pecuniary gain, of another's body, directly or indirectly, using any body part, object, instrument, substance or device. The following are specifically exempted from this paragraph: 
a.  A person licensed as a massage therapist or apprentice massage therapist providing massage services only in a licensed massage establishment; 
b.  A person licensed under state law to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropracty, naturopathy, or podiatry, or persons licensed as a physician's assistant, or holding a drugless practitioner's certificate; 
c.  A nurse registered under state law; 
d.  A barber or beautician license under state law; 
e.  A cosmetologist licensed under state law; 
f.  A person performing any services in any hospital, clinic, nursing home or sanitarium licensed under state law; 
g.  A person performing ear-piercing services; 
h.  A person who performs the practice of tattooing of human skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting color matter so as to form indelible pigments, dyes, marks or figures under the skin or by the production of scars; 
i.  An instructor, coach or trainer employed by or on behalf of any bona fide professional, Olympic or sanctioned amateur athletic team, governmental entity or any bona fide state, county or private educational institution; 
j.  A physical therapist licensed under state law. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of material, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. 
Business days shall mean Monday through Friday, except for Federal or State holidays. Business days shall not include Saturdays and Sundays. 
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
County means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Park means a tract of land kept for ornament or recreation and maintained as public property. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex or other multifamily housing for human dwelling, or any portion zoned therefor. 
Premises shall mean the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
School means state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, that teach subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers or facilities for persons of all ages. 
Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Sexual device shall be defined to mean any three-dimensional object, instrument, novelty, device or other paraphernalia designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, or that is designed and marketed for use in connection with Specified Sexual Activities, and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for prevention of pregnancy, and/or bona fide medical and healthcare products and devices. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices, as defined herein. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(6)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § III, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-304. - Adult entertainment license. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so, except as provided in subsection 18-314(a)(3) of this article when the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 business days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the county if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Regulatory fees. In addition to any occupation tax required for transaction of business in Cherokee County, there shall be an initial regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment in the amount of $750.00, which shall be due and payable to Cherokee County, and delivered to the attention of the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, within five business days of the granting of an adult entertainment establishment license. There shall also be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the county in the amount of $750.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative no later than November 30 of the year preceding the year for which the renewal is to be effective. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the county zoning administrator on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(c)  License nontransferable. No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entity. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license; and in such case, the permit upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either 20 percent or more of any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of the license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(d)  Change in location or name. 
(1)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a notice of change of location has been provided to the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, and the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative has confirmed that the proposed site for relocation is compliant with this article. 
(2)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his/her/its name and the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(3)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article, as well as all other county ordinances and regulations concerning extension or expansion of a building or other place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § IV, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-305. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § V, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-306. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of the county shall make application to the county zoning administrator or to his or her designated representative. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the county, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent, for purposes of making application for a license hereunder, shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable investigative fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $750.00, to defray, in part, the expense of investigation and reporting as required by this article, and a nonrefundable license application fee of $50.00, to cover the expense of processing, shall be paid to the county zoning administrator or to his or her designated representative. The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee(s) have been paid. 
The application for a license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant and the operator(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant and the operator(s) for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Written proof, consisting of either a driver's license, military identification, passport, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency, that the applicant and the operator(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's and operator's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant and the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant and the operator(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  All convictions received by the applicant and the operators (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department authorizing the release of his or her criminal history record information so that such person may provide his or her criminal history record information to the county; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf an application is made for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant and the operator(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s), and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The county shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, and the operator(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity in feet to any residence, area zoned residential, church, school, library, college campus, public park, cemetery, government building, civic center, children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine, or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by this article or by any subsequent resolution of the board of commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The county shall have 30 business days from the date of actual receipt of the application and investigatory fee to investigate the information provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s), and owner(s). The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof, and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 business days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative finds: 
(1)  The required $750.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant, nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12(a)(4)(A) and (B), within a period of five years prior to the date of the application. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant, nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by this county or any other county or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential use, church, school, college campus, public park, cemetery, children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine, or other adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of Cherokee County, the State of Georgia or the United States. 
The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § VI, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-307. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land that falls within any of the following zoning districts as defined by the 1992 Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, as amended, and the official zoning map of Cherokee County: R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10, RZL, RA, RTH, RM-10, RM-16, RD-3, PUD, AG, NC, or TND; 
(2)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park, cemetery, or children's day care or playground facility is located; 
(3)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than a GC (General Commercial), HC (Highway Commercial), LI (Light Industrial) or HI (Heavy Industrial) zoning district; or 
(5)  Within 750 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement ("as the crow flies") from property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in subsection 18-306(d)(3) of this article within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts, or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit for employment. 
a.  Before any person may work as an adult entertainer, as defined by this article, at a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (1) above, he or she shall file an application with the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative on forms supplied by the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, along with a nonrefundable investigation fee in the amount of $75.00 to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article, and must receive a permit for such employment from the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative. The prospective employee shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department authorizing the release of his or her criminal history record information so that the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department or the prospective employee may provide such criminal history record information to the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in subsection 18-306(d)(3) of this article (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. 
b.  The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall approve or deny the permit within 15 business days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If such permit is not issued within 48 hours of such finding, the employee seeking the permit may commence work at the adult entertainment establishment, which is the subject of the permit application, without such a permit. 
c.  If the permit application is denied, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall provide the prospective employee the reason(s) for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, who shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in subsection 18-306(d)(3) of this article shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall schedule a hearing before the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners to consider such action, and shall notify the employee, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefore. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. No adult entertainment establishment may be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(g)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § VII, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-308. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years, or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment shall admit or permit the admission or entry of a person under the age of 18 years within an adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall knowingly or intentionally occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall knowingly or intentionally be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. 
(f)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment, or offer of solicitation of money occurring between a patron and an employee. 
(g)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to insert an object [into] her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(i)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of breasts. 
(j)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer a male employee or person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(k)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(l)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such a manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person not employed therein. 
(m)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises, while nude or semi-nude, to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap or body of any patron, spectator, employee or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by such patron, spectator or other patron. 
(n)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall knowingly or intentionally permit or suffer an employee or other person on the premises to fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any employee in a lewd or sexual manner or for sexual gratification. 
(o)  No tips for any adult entertainment establishment entertainers, performers or employees shall be placed on the person of the entertainer, performer or employee except by hand to hand contact. 
(p)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted, operated or licenses if any adult entertainment activity or performance is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(q)  No illegal drugs or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(r)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall knowingly or intentionally be allowed to engage in any "specified sexual activity," as defined herein, on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(s)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, knowingly or intentionally commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § VIII, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-309. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of section 18-308 of this article shall be subject to citation and upon conviction in Magistrate Court a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation of license. Violations of the provisions of section 18-308 of this article shall be considered due cause for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this article. 
(c)  Scienter required. This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing, intentional, willful, or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the adult entertainment establishment licensed for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, general partner, operator, or person who manages, supervises or controls the operations of the business premises, knowingly, intentionally, willfully, or recklessly allowed prohibited conduct or activities to occur on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § IX, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-310. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § X, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-311. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge, or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XI, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-312. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult entertainment establishment to: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. 
(b)  If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to fail to fulfill that duty. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XII, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-313. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county and the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, the Cherokee County Fire Chief, the Cherokee County Marshal, and the Cherokee County Sheriff shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes, ordinances, regulations and laws of the county and the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, the Cherokee County Marshal, and/or the Cherokee County Sheriff shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XIII, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-314. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under subsection 18-306(d)(3) above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 business days of actual receipt of a fully completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 business days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 business days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 business days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by the preceding sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative shall schedule a hearing before the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five days of its decision. 
(d)  Appeal; procedure. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the county zoning administrator or his or her designated representative pursuant to this article may seek review of such decision by filing an appeal of same to the board of commissioners. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners and name and address of the appellant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners after receipt of the notice of appeal. The board of commissioners shall render a decision within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the board of commissioner's decision on the matter appealed shall be delivered to the appellant by certified mail within five business days of the decision. Any decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless such decision is appealed to the Cherokee County Superior Court within 30 days of said decision by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XIV, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-315. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd, or illegal under any other applicable code, regulation, or statute. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XV, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-316. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued, cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XVI, 5-18-10) 
Sec. 18-317. - Removal of signs when license suspended or revoked. 
When any adult entertainment establishment license is revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-003, § XVII, 5-18-10) 
Secs. 18-318—18-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AMBULANCE FRANCHISES 

Sec. 18-361. - Definitions. 
As used in this division the following words and phrases will have the following meaning unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means a vehicle which travels on the ground and is equipped with facilities intended for the transportation of ill or injured persons. 
County means the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County or their designee. 
Emergency medical technician (EMT) must be certified by the State of Georgia and the Department of Human Resources. 
Paramedic means any person certified by the state and the department of human resources to perform emergency medical service in accordance with state law and in accordance with regulations of the state board of health. A paramedic includes persons assigned to work in an ambulance and persons assigned to work with mobile equipment that is not contained in an ambulance. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 1, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-362. - Franchise required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any ambulance service, or any paramedic service on the streets of the county without first obtaining a franchise for such service. This section shall not prevent ambulance service located outside of the county from picking up a patient outside of the county and bringing the patient into the county. This division will not prevent any ambulance service located outside the county from occasionally responding to an emergency call in the county if no ambulance service franchised by the county is able to make a prompt response to the emergency call. This division will not prevent any ambulance service located outside the county from picking up a patient in the county for transfer to a location outside the county either as an emergency or as a nonemergency transfer. The franchise shall be for not more than three years. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 2, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-363. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 dollars for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 3, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-364. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Each franchise granted under this division will be a nonexclusive franchise. The county does not agree to restrict the number of franchises in all or any part of the county for any person, firm or corporation in the same business, a competing business or any related business. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 4, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-365. - Quality of service required. 
All of the service to be provided by the company will be provided in a careful and prudent manner so as to avoid any injury or damage to any person and so as to minimize the possibility of any property damage. The company will be responsible for the acts of all its officers and employees. If the company prevents or permits repeated violations of this section, the county will cancel the franchise in accordance with the provisions of the section entitled "inspections" of this division. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 5, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-366. - Promptness of response. 
In determining priorities for response for calls, the company will divide all calls into three categories: life-threatening emergencies, nonlife-threatening emergencies, and nonemergency transfers. In making a decision as to which category applies to a call, the company will consider information available to the company at the time and the company is not required to obtain any professional advice. Emergencies will include all injuries and all serious illnesses when the patient is not in a location where adequate treatment may be obtained, unless the attending physician orally states that the situation is not an emergency. All other patient transfers such as transfer of a patient from one institution to another for tests or treatment will be considered nonemergency transportation. In responding to calls, the company will respond promptly to each call, provided that enough vehicles will be kept available and in reserve to respond to anticipated emergency and life-threatening calls. The company will respond to life-threatening calls first, then to other emergencies and last to nonemergency transportation. The company will provide a report once a month to the county indicating average times and the maximum times of response during the past month for life-threatening emergencies, other emergencies and nonemergency calls. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 6, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-367. - Termination or suspension of franchise. 
The franchise granted by this division may be suspended temporarily for a period not to exceed 30 days at a time, if the company fails to comply with the terms of this division and if the failure to comply results in dangers to patients due to inadequate response to calls, due to inadequate equipment and care, or due to any other cause. This franchise may be terminated 30 days after notice to the company for repeated violations by the company of provisions of this franchise. A notice of termination will not automatically result in a suspension but the county may suspend a company's rights under this franchise while a termination is pending, if under the provisions of this section the suspension is justified or required. The company may request a hearing under the provisions of the section dealing with "hearings" of this division on any suspension or termination. The hearing or request for a hearing will not render any suspension ineffective. If the company files a written request for a hearing on a termination with the county manager at least 15 days before the effective date of termination, the termination will not go into effect until after a hearing is held on the question of termination. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 7, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-368. - Inspection. 
The county may at any time during reasonable business hours inspect the financial records of the company and inspect the time records of the company to determine whether the company is complying with the terms of this division. The company may keep records using account numbers or patient numbers rather than names and addresses. At the request in writing of any patient who has ridden in an ambulance, the company will provide the account number or patient number applying to that patient and the company will compile or furnish to the county all of its records relating to that patient. The county may copy at the county's expense, any company records that the county has a right to inspect. The county will not remove any records from the company's office without the consent of the company. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 8, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-369. - Franchise fee. 
The company will pay to the county a franchise fee to help defer the costs to the county of administering this division. The franchise fee will be $1,500.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 9, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-370. - Hearings. 
All hearings under this division will be held as public hearings before the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. All persons desiring to be heard will be heard and any person appearing at the hearing may be represented by an attorney. The hearing may be adjourned to a later date for completion of debate and all action of the board of commissioners relating to this hearing will be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 10, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-371. - Term and renewal of franchise. 
The franchise will be in full force and effect from the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 19 ____________ , to the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . This franchise may be renewed in its present form or under revised conditions at any time before or after its expiration. The county will not agree to renew this franchise until after the county has publicly announced that proposals will be received from any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain an ambulance franchise in the county and a deadline has been set for receiving such proposals at least two weeks after the first announcement about the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 11, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-372. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
This is a nonexclusive franchise. The county does not agree to restrict the number of franchises to be issued covering any or part of the county for any person, firm or corporation in the same business, a competing business or any related business. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 12, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-373. - Minimum requirements. 
All ambulance services operating within Cherokee County shall be subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  All operating ambulances will be staffed and equipped to provide advanced life support as described in Chapter 290-5-30 of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources Public Health. Additionally, each ambulance operating must be staffed by one Georgia certified emergency medical technician (EMT), one Georgia licensed paramedic and have the capability to provide external cardiovascutaneous cardiac pacing. 
(2)  All vehicles operated must be Georgia licensed ambulance vehicles. No vehicles shall be over 60 months old at any time during operation. This refers to the original date that the chassis was manufactured into an ambulance. 
(3)  Insurance for the following limits must be in force at all times during operation. 
a.  General liability—$1,500,000.00. 
b.  Professional liability—$1,500,000.00. 
c.  Auto liability—$1,500,000.00. 
d.  Workman's comp—Georgia statutory limits. 
e.  Employers liability—$100,000.00, $500,000.00, $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 13, 4-28-95) 
Sec. 18-374. - Existing ambulance services. 
All existing ambulance services operating within Cherokee County on the date of the adoption of this division shall be required to comply with this division within 90 days of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6, § 14, 4-28-95) 
Secs. 18-375—18-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STATES OF EMERGENCY 
DIVISION 1. - OVERCHARGING OF GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING 

Sec. 18-401. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-19, § 1, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-402. - Definitions. 
Overcharging. The term overcharging is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term state of emergency is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3 (5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term subsequent recovery period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-19, § 2, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-403. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-19, § 3, 7-13-99) 
Secs. 18-404—18-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 18-411. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 1, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-412. - Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this division, the word or term building contractor shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be doing business and subject to the requirements of this division if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term state of emergency is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term subsequent recovery period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 2, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-413. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 3, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-414. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 4, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-415. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this ordinance. Violation of this ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 5, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-416. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 6, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-417. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 7, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 18-418. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this ordinance or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-20, § 8, 7-13-99) 
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the ordinance adopted December 29, 1988, granting to Prestige Cable TV, Inc., a franchise to operate a cable system within the county is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Chapter 24 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRESERVATION OF CEMETERIES 

Sec. 24-26. - Policy. 
(a)  The care accorded the remains of a deceased person reflects respect and regard for human dignity as well as cultural, spiritual, and religious values. The board of commissioners declares that human remains and burial objects are not property to be owned by the persons or entity which owns the land or water where the human remains and burial objects are interred or discovered, but human remains and burial objects are part of a finite, irreplaceable, and nonrenewable cultural heritage of the people of the county which should be protected. 
(b)  It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the provisions of this article be construed to require respectful treatment of human remains in accord with the equal and innate dignity of every human being and consistent with the identifiable ethnic, cultural and religious affiliation of the deceased individual as indicated by the method of burial or other historical evidence or reliable information. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-5, § 1, 3-10-98) 
Sec. 24-27. - Permit required for developing land on which cemetery located. 
No known cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial objects shall be knowingly disturbed by the owner or occupier of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located for the purposes of developing or changing the use of any part of such land unless a permit is first obtained from the board of commissioners, wherein the cemetery or burial ground is located, which shall have the authority to permit such activity except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-14. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-5, § 2, 3-10-98) 
Sec. 24-28. - Procedure. 
As there is a presumption in favor of leaving a cemetery or burial ground undisturbed, the persons seeking to, in any way, disturb such cemetery shall be required to obtain a permit from the board of commissioners in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-5, § 3, 3-10-98) 
Chapter 25 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SAFEGUARDING OF MINORS AND INCAPACITATED ADULTS 

Sec. 25-26. - [Enactment.] 
This article is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1), the Georgia Umbrella Statute entitled "Disclosure and dissemination of records to public agencies and political subdivisions, responsibility and liability of issuing center". 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-002, § 1, 4-1-08) 
Sec. 25-27. - [Purpose.] 
The purpose of this article shall be to carry out consent criminal histories in guardianship and conservatorship proceedings involving minors and incapacitated adults in the Cherokee County Probate Court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-002, § 2, 4-1-08) 
Sec. 25-28. - [Access authorized; usage regulations.] 
(a)  The Cherokee County Probate Court is hereby authorized to access national criminal history record information (CHRI) pursuant to said statute, the same being based upon submission of fingerprints, which is considered consent by the F.B.I. 
(b)  Access to criminal histories is limited to staff members of the Cherokee County Probate Court who are certified in security and integrity and whose certification is renewed every two years as required by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI). 
(c)  The usage of the GCIC terminal shall be in compliance with GBI and FBI regulations at all times, which access may be for the purpose of carrying out name-based Georgia record checks or obtaining confirmation of the removal of said warning flags where the record was corrected. 
(1)  Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this article shall comply with all Georgia laws and the Federal Privacy Act. 
(2)  No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this article may be entered on a data base. 
(3)  No information given or obtained pursuant to this article shall be subject to the Open Records Act. 
(4)  Documents received as a result of a record request in guardianship and conservatorship proceedings in the probate court shall be destroyed pursuant to the requirements of the state's retention schedule; however, in the event of a discharge or termination of a guardianship or conservatorship, these records may be destroyed at the time of the discharge or termination. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-002, §§ 3—9, 4-1-08) 
Sec. 25-29. - [Administration; fees; procedures.] 
(a)  Where the probate court determines that a national criminal history is necessary, two sets of fingerprints shall be given, which fingerprints may be taken by the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department or by the Cherokee County Probate Court upon installing a live-scan fingerprinting unit. 
(b)  The record applicant will bear the cost of: (1) fingerprinting if carried out by the sheriff; (2) the charge by the GBI and FBI for the CHRI history at its latest rate, paid by certified or cashiers check, or money order; and (3) an administrative fee allowed by statute to be charged by the Cherokee County Probate Court, the last of which shall be the maximum allowed by statute, currently $20.00, which fee shall include fingerprinting where carried out by the probate court using live-scan. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the Cherokee County Probate Court will transmit the said fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between the Cherokee County Probate Court and the GCIC and/or FBI) to the GCIC. As provided by law, the GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with nation-wide records, unless submission is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the F.B.I. check will be returned based on its current procedure, presently being directly to the court if submissions are manual to GCIC, or electronically from both the GBI and FBI, where submitted electronically to the GCIC. 
(d)  In compliance with Federal law 92-544, which provides for the rendering a "fitness determination," the Cherokee County Probate Court will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for: (a) a crime which bears upon his/her ability or fitness to serve in that capacity; (b) any felony or a misdemeanor which involved force or threat of force, controlled substances, or was a sex-related offense; or (c) enumerated disqualifiers. 
(e)  A person who has consented to the probate court for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the Cherokee County Probate Court at no additional charge. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-002, §§ 10—14, 4-1-08) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; floods, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62; zoning, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c); nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over such violations. 
(Ord. of 10-14-86) 
Sec. 26-37. - Exemptions from article. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed to mean work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 
(Ord. of 2-26-80) 
Sec. 26-38. - Declaration of nuisance; abatement. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of this article, or the conduct of any of the events set forth in this article which is unlawful, is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by restraining order of injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-26-80) 
Sec. 26-39. - Prohibited noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within the limits of the county, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 7:00 a.m. daily, and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight Saturday) and 1:00 p.m. Sunday. Also, all noises described in this section shall be unlawful after 6:30 p.m. Sunday until 7:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  The following noises and acts are prohibited and are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the county, except as a warning signal, is prohibited. 
(2)  Automobile racing, sporting events and other public meetings. Public meetings and automobile racing and other sporting events shall be unlawful during the hours set forth in this section if held in an open place, by which the peace and quiet of any neighborhood shall be disturbed. Outside sporting events, including but not limited to automobile racing, shall not be conducted during the hours specified in this section without a permit from the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers mounted on vehicles. The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted on any vehicle for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity or any other purpose shall be unlawful during the hours set forth in this section, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Construction activity. The operating of any equipment or any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads or other projects within the county between the hours set forth in this section shall be unlawful unless a permit for such construction between such hours has been obtained from the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-26-80; Ord. No. 2003-O-008, 11-18-03) 
Secs. 26-40—26-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-005, adopted June 6, 2017, amended Art. III to read as set out herein. Former Art. III, §§ 26-66—26-75, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2004-O-002, §§ I—X, adopted April 20, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-002, §§ I—VII, IX, XI, adopted May 17, 2005; Ord. No. 2008-O-005, adopted Dec. 16, 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-O-004, §§ I—X, adopted June 1, 2010. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-66. - Title. 
This ordinance will be known as "Cherokee County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § I, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-67. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 26-69(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
GESA: Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act of 1975. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 26-68(5). 
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minor erosion control permit: A permit required by Cherokee County for land disturbing activities that are exempted by the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act (GESA) but not the county. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § II, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-68. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 26-59(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
Cherokee County will require a minor erosion control permit for any land disturbing activity not covered by a GESA permit, including but not limited to the following activities: 
a.  Retaining walls or seawalls; 
b.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre; 
c.  Stream crossings by individual property owners; 
d.  Land disturbing activities less than one (1) acre located within or adjacent to stream buffers or setbacks, lake buffers, floodplains, wetlands, rights-of-way, or drainage easements; 
e.  Any land disturbing activity requiring engineering coordination, such as storm drainage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § III, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-69. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 26-69(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 26-69(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in [subsection] (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 26-69(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  The surface area of erodible material at one time shall not exceed 17 acres. 
(18)  All exposed slopes will be treated with geotextile fabric or coated with a polymer material or will utilize other methods approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department to prevent erosion. 
(19)  All areas of erodible earth material shall be exposed no longer than one week before the area is stabilized with grass, straw, mulch and seed or a combination of these. The stabilization of new exposed areas shall occur weekly. 
(20)  Utility companies utilizing roadway shoulders for construction are required to stabilize the earth shoulders every three days as a maximum period of time. Also they are required to stabilize the shoulder before leaving the work area on any particular day if rain is forecast within the next 24 hours. 
(21)  Mud or any form of sediment shall not be allowed on any roadway whether it is a Cherokee County accepted or dedicated roadway. A dedicated roadway is one that has been dedicated by the filing of a final plat but has not been accepted by Cherokee County for maintenance purposes. 
(22)  Two rows of Type "S" silt fence, as defined by the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control current edition, shall be installed at all locations where construction activity will be adjacent to a state waters buffer. 
(23)  All waste from construction activities shall be controlled and properly disposed of in a manner which prevents adverse impacts to water quality. Waste includes, but is not limited to: discarded building materials, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste, and concrete washout. A designated area for concrete wash-down of tools, concrete mixer chutes, hoppers and the rear of vehicles shall be provided in a location convenient to construction activities and readily accessible by concrete trucks. The designated area shall be a zero discharge containment facility which completely prevents concrete wash water from infiltrating into the ground or discharging to any natural or structural storm water drainage conveyance or to any waters of the state. Washout of the drum of a concrete truck at a construction site, unless in a designated wash-down facility, is prohibited. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 26-69(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § IV, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-70. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Cherokee County without first obtaining a permit from the Cherokee County Engineering Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Cherokee County Development Services Center and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 26-69(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  Applicants intending to submit an erosion and sedimentation control plan to perform a land disturbing activity in Cherokee County shall first schedule a pre-design meeting with County Engineering Department staff in order to review the minimum requirements required to be shown on the erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(4)  A fee, in the amount of $700.00 per acre, with a $1,000.00 minimum for commercial projects and $1.00 per linear foot of streets for residential projects shall be charged for land disturbing activities. 
(5)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(6)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 26-69(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(7)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(8)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 26-69(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by subsection 26-69(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(7)  No permit for land-disturbing activity will be issued to an applicant without the applicant first attending a mandatory pre-construction conference with the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § V, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-71. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Cherokee County Engineering Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Cherokee County Engineering Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § VI, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-72. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § VII, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-73. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § I, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-74. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § IX, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-76. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 7th day of June 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-005, § X, 6-6-2017) 
Secs. 26-76—26-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-O-010, adopted Nov. 2, 2004, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 26-121—26-126, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances listed in the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 26-121. - General requirements. 
(a)  All burning operations shall comply with "rules for air quality control"; chapter 391-3-1 revised 1998 as written and as amended by the Environmental Protection Division, air protection branch unless specifically amended by this article. 
(b)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area of the county including the cities of Holly Springs, Ball Ground, Nelson, and Waleska. All permits under section "B" shall be permitted by Georgia Forestry Commission except for residents inside the following cities: 
City of Holly Springs. 
City of Ball Ground. 
City of Nelson. 
City of Waleska. 
Residents in the above mentioned cities shall receive permits from the Fire and Emergency Services Division by calling (678) 493-4022 or going to the counties website. 
All burning requirements of this section shall be followed by the citizens of the designated cites when burn permits are issued. 
(1)  Reduction of leaves on premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises, unless prohibited by local ordinance and/or regulation. 
(2)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting crops. 
(3)  The "prescribed burning" of any forest land by the owners or the owner's designee. 
(4)  The "slash burning" of any forest land by the owner or the owner's designee. 
(5)  Fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental authority. 
(6)  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption. 
(7)  Acquired structure burns provided that an authorization to burn certificate has been issued by the division. 
(8)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(9)  Packaging materials Disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulation. 
(10)  The burning of "household" garbage is not authorized under this article and is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Open burning of vegetative material for the purpose of land clearing using an air curtain destructor provided the following conditions are met. 
The company/contractor/landowner in control of the property is responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article and the rules established by EPA/EPD. 
Any violation of this article the company/contractor/landowner will be responsible for any citations or court orders issued by the magistrate judge. 
(1)  Fires will be authorized between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset as announced by the local news media. All fires are to be completely extinguished by the specified time unless special conditions exist and prior authorization has been granted. It is the responsibility of the party requesting the permit to notify the issuing agency of the special conditions when the permit is being issued. 
(2)  No open burning will be authorized when weather conditions (wind, humidity, temperature, mixing level, overcast, etc.) may jeopardize the safety of life and property as determined by the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) based on the daily weather forecast obtained from the state forestry commission or other weather forecasting resource. 
(3)  No burning of any material that produces a smoke opacity greater than 40 percent. Determination of compliance will be at the discretion of the inspector. 
(4)  The location of the burning is not within 1,000 feet from any structure or not within 300 feet of any street, road or highway open to the public. 
(5)  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population. 
(6)  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimal. 
(7)  Petroleum oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material other plant growth are not being burned. 
(8)  An air curtain destructor (ACD) is utilized and no more than one ACD is used for each ten acres of area with at least 1,000 feet between ACD's. 
(9)  The ACD is operated in accordance with the guidelines established by EPD. 
(10)  No open burning will be authorized during an air pollution episode or when restrictions are imposed by a state or federal agency for other reasons. 
(11)  All required permits will be issued by the county fire marshal or his/her designee. 
(12)  Permits may be revoked at any time by the issuing agency or its representing agency if conditions or permit restrictions require such. 
a.  Spoil pile burning above open pit. 
b.  Burning before or after authorized time stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
c.  Burning in violation of any of these requirements set worth by this article. 
(13)  Permits are valid for the date of issuance unless otherwise noted. (30 days) 
(d)  Emergency burning. 
(1)  An emergency burning request can be made by the Cherokee County Commissioners Office to the Directors Office of Environmental Protection Division. 
(2)  Burning of storm debris on-site may be authorized by the fire marshal or his or her designee when the emergency requested is granted by the Director of Environmental Protection Division. 
(e)  Emergency burning requirements. Open burning on privately owned, residential property emergency burning regulations. 
Homeowners or residents of single-family residential property are authorized to have open fires provided all of the following requirements are met. 
(1)  The fire(s) must be on the property occupied by the person receiving the permit. 
(2)  Only natural vegetation can be destroyed by burning. "Natural vegetation" includes sticks, tree parts six inches and less in diameter, grass, pine straw, hedge trimmings, etc. Burning of poison oak, poison ivy, and any other vegetation which produces severe respiratory damage is not allowed. Burning of cardboard, treated wood, materials containing petroleum products, i.e., tires, plastics, wire insulation, roofing shingles, etc., is not allowed. 
(3)  No vegetation pile shall be larger than six feet in diameter by two feet in height. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of ten feet between vegetation piles. 
(5)  No burning is allowed within 50 feet of a structure. 
(6)  No burning is allowed within 25 feet of a wooded area, pine island, or other 1 lightweight class A fuel. 
(7)  No fire shall be within 25 feet of the adjacent property line. 
(8)  All open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person 16 years of age or older to monitor and control such burning, rake, shovel, or similar hand tool, and charged water hose that will reach to the most remote point of the burn material is to be immediately available. 
(9)  No more than two burning piles are allowed at any one time. 
(10)  Failure to comply with these rules which results in an uncontrolled fire or a valid complaint by nearby property owner(s) or resident that requires the response of the county fire and rescue service will result in the fire being extinguished immediately. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The following procedures shall be followed during enforcement actions. 
a.  The fire station is notified of any illegal burns that are in violation of this article. The home owner, lessee, or other is advised of the burning regulations and is given a non-compliance letter and a copy of the burning regulations. 
b.  The second response to the same location for illegal burning practices the fire marshals office is notified and a citation will be issued at the desecration of the fire marshal or his/her designee. The owner will be required to appear in magistrate court judge for determination of fine or fines. 
c.  The third time response to the same location for illegal burning practices the fire marshals office is notified again and a citation will be issued by the fire marshal or his/her designee. The owner will be required to appear in magistrate court judge for determination of fine or fines. Additional jail time/community service or both will be imposed on the violator. 
d.  Habitual violators of four or more occurrences of the burning regulations will be incarcerated until judicial appearance is assigned by judge and sentences or fines are set. 
The fire marshal or his or her designee shall be responsible for enforcement of this article. The fire marshal or his or her designee shall be authorized to issue a citation returnable to the magistrate's court for violation of this or any other fire safety ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-010, 11-2-04) 
Chapter 28 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, adopted August 21, 2018, repealed and reenacted ch. 28 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 28, §§ 28-26—28-38, 28-51—28-59, 28-71, 28-72, and 28-91—28-93, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 98-O-18, §§ 1—9, adopted Sept. 25, 1998; Ord. No. 99-O-28, §§ 1—8, adopted Sept. 14, 1999; Ord. No. 99-O-10, §§ 14.31 and 14.32, adopted March 23, 1999; Ord. No. 2001-010, §§ I—III, adopted July 17, 2001; Ord. No. 2007-O-003, adopted July 17, 2007; and Ord. No. 2010-O-001, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 2010. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 28-26. - Adoption of state minimum standards. 
(a)  The board of commissioners desires to protect the lives and property of the citizens from fire and explosion hazards. In furtherance of such objective, the state minimum fire safety standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.), including all subsequent revisions thereof, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference to this chapter. In addition, the following regulations are also adopted and incorporated by reference to this chapter: 
(1)  Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D of the adopted International Fire Code (hereinafter "IFC"); 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes provided for in divisions (9)(A)(i) and (9)(B)(i) of Code Section 8-2-20 Building Code including all subsequent revisions thereof, as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; and 
(3)  Article 3 of Title 8 Chapter 2 of the Official Code of Georgia entitled, "Application of Existing Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings" also known to be cited as "The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings." 
(b)  There shall be not less than one copy of the aforementioned codes, regulations, and standards filed in the office of the fire marshal, and the codes regulations, and standards referenced hereto are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out completely in this article. 
(c)  The state minimum fire safety standards shall apply to all structures in unincorporated Cherokee County, as well as any jurisdictions where such services have been provided for by agreement, provided that one-family and two-family dwellings and two-family row houses (townhouses) separated by a two-hour fire wall and two-family townhouses separated by a 2-hour fire wall shall be exempted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-27. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or appurtenances connected to or attached to such buildings or structures, except for one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-28. - Establishment of duties of the community risk reduction division. 
(a)  This chapter and all adopted and applicable fire codes and standards shall be enforced by the community risk reduction division, which is hereby established, and which shall be operated under the supervision and direction of the fire chief or his/her designee, the community risk reduction division chief or his/her designee, and the fire marshal or his/her designee. The community risk reduction division chief and the fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief. 
(b)  The community risk reduction division shall be responsible for conducting investigations of fires in the county. The division shall also be responsible for public fire safety education under the direction of the fire marshal. 
(c)  The fire chief may assign/detail members of Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services as inspectors, investigators, or fire safety education specialists as shall from time to time be necessary. Each member assigned as fire inspector, investigator, or fire safety education specialist may be reassigned to the fire suppression force at the discretion of the fire chief. 
(d)  A report of the community risk reduction division shall be made monthly and transmitted to the fire chief. It shall contain all the proceedings under the Fire Prevention Code and public fire safety education, along with any other statistics/metrics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. The fire chief shall also recommend any amendments to the code, which in his judgement shall be desirable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-29. - Inspections required. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction work pertaining to fire codes and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, site, or facility. 
(b)  Owners and/or their agents/designees of all buildings, tenant spaces, and/or commercial sites covered by this article are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the fire marshal prior to obtaining the necessary construction permits. A 50 percent completion inspection, an 80 percent completion inspection, a 100 percent final inspection, and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the fire marshal prior to the occupancy of the facility as required by this chapter and other applicable rules/regulations. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected any tenant occupancy change or any change in business license in conjunction with the development service center of Cherokee County. 
(d)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected existing buildings and structures as applicable in accordance with section 28-26 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-30. - Fees. 
Fees for plan review, inspections, re-inspections, and certificates of occupancy shall be as established from time to time by the board of commissioners. A copy of all currently established fees shall be available by contacting Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services and/or the county clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-31. - Violations, stop work orders, and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes or standards adopted by reference in this chapter or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to this chapter, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order shall constitute a violation of a county ordinance. Any person violating this chapter or any of the codes, standards, and/or laws incorporated in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 as may be amended from time to time. The imposition of one penalty shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a specified time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(c)  Upon written notice from the fire marshal or his/her designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this chapter and the codes or standards adopted in this chapter, or otherwise being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(d)  Permits or approvals may be revoked by fire plan review, or by the fire marshal, or his/her designee, when there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any materials or facts contained in plans or other information on which the permit or approval has been based. 
(e)  Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services find conditions which are unsafe and/or in violation of the provisions or intent of the codes, standards, or ordinances enforced herein, written notice may be given to the owner, the owner's agent, or the occupant or occupant's representative requiring that any activities impacted by the conditions shall cease until the condition is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-32. - Application for interpretation and equivalency. 
(a)  In the event that an individual has a request concerning the interpretation of this chapter or concerning the appropriateness of equivalent alternatives to requirements of this chapter, such requests shall be submitted in the form of an application to the fire marshal. The application shall be in the form as approved by the fire chief, but shall at a minimum include: 1) reference to specific fire code(s) applicant is requesting an interpretation or equivalency from; 2) justification of interpretation or equivalency as well as identifying relief being requested; and 3) identification of alternative method to code requirement. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application, the fire marshal may consult with the director of planning and land use, the director of building inspections, and director of engineering. The fire marshal may also request a letter from the applicant's attorney and/or insurance company requesting confirmation of the applicant's request for code interpretation and statement of support or objection to applicant's interpretation of the fire code. The fire marshal in his/her discretion may take such other investigatory steps as deemed appropriate to fully evaluate the application, including requesting additional information from the applicant. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall issue a decision on the application within ten days of receipt of a completed application. An application shall not be deemed complete if the fire marshal has requested any information from the applicant, which has not been provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-33. - Appeals from decision of the fire marshal. 
(a)  Anyone who disagrees with the decision of the fire marshal may appeal such decision to the fire chief by submitting a written appeal to the fire marshal within ten days of the issuance of the fire marshal's decision that is the subject of the appeal. 
(b)  The fire chief, or his/her designee, shall review, consider, and take action on any such appeal. The fire chief, or his/her designee, may undertake such investigation as is necessary to fully evaluate the appeal, including requesting additional information from the applicant or requesting a confirmation letter as discussed above from the applicant's attorney and/or insurance company. 
(c)  Within ten days of receipt of an appeal, the fire chief, or his/her designee, shall issue a written determination affirming, modifying, or vacating the fire marshal's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-34. - Fire code board of appeals ("FCBA"). 
(a)  The establishment of the fire code board of appeals provides another level of review to an individual who wishes to appeal the decision of the fire chief. The purpose of this section is to provide a method to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the code, regulations, and rules adopted by the county. 
(b)  To accomplish the foregoing purposes, there is hereby created a fire code board of appeals ("FCBA") consisting of five members appointed by the county board of commissioners. Each member of the board of commissioners shall have one appointee to the FCBA. To ensure balance on the FCBA, each member must have experience as an architect, fire protection engineer, builder, property manager, or construction superintendent, or such other experience as may be useful to consideration of these issues. No county employee can serve as a member of the FCBA. No member of the FCBA can hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial interest. Members of the FCBA shall serve with or without compensation, as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The FCBA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the fire chief, or his/her designee, relative to the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the code, regulations, and rules adopted by the county. The FCBA shall not have the authority to amend such code, regulations, or rules; neither does the FCBA have the authority to correct what it may consider to be an unwise requirement. The powers and duties of the FCBA are limited to quasi-judicial and administrative matters as set forth in this chapter. In making any interpretation of the code, regulations, and rules, or granting any equivalency, the FCBA shall make the following findings: 
(1)  That the interpretation or equivalency is consistent with the purpose of this chapter and not in violation with any other applicable state or federal law; 
(2)  That the interpretation or equivalency will not lessen the protection to the people of the county and property situated therein. 
(d)  The terms of office of the members of the FCBA shall run concurrently with the term of the member of the board of commissioners who appointed that particular member. In any event, a term shall not exceed four years in the absence of reappointment. 
(e)  Members of the FCBA may be removed at any time by the appointing member of the board of commissioners for cause or for no cause. Members whose terms have expired should continue to serve as members until their successors have been appointed. 
(f)  In conducting its business, the FCBA shall comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  Meetings of the FCBA shall be held at the call of the chair of the FCBA, provided that due notice shall first be given. The chair of the FCBA, or in his/her absence the acting vice-chair of the FCBA, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the FCBA shall be open to the public. The FCBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be a public record. 
(2)  Three members of the FCBA shall constitute a quorum. The vote of three FCBA members is necessary to render any decision or take any action. 
(3)  The FCBA shall elect a chair and vice-chair to serve for a period of one year, with such one-year period to run per calendar year. 
(4)  The FCBA shall make and enforce such rules, regulations, and bylaws for the government of itself, the preservation of order, and the transaction of its business as may be necessary. Rules, regulations, and bylaws adopted by the FCBA shall not take effect until they are submitted to and approved by the county board of commissioners. 
(g)  In deciding appeals, the FCBA shall comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the fire chief, or his/her designee, made in the course of the administration or enforcement of the code, regulations, and rules may appeal to the FCBA by filing a request in writing with the fire marshal, and by paying a fee in an amount to be approved by the board of commissioners, provided such appeal is made within 30 days from the date the decision is rendered by the fire chief, or his/her designee. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application and required fee, the fire marshal shall transmit to the FCBA all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(3)  The FCBA shall review the application at a public hearing. The purpose of the public hearing is to enable the FCBA to obtain facts surrounding the case which may not be evident, or which may not be shown in the record as submitted to the FCBA. The decision of the FCBA shall be based upon the facts and not upon expressions of support or protest, or lack of support or protest, which may be made at the hearing. Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(4)  The FCBA, subject to the provisions and restraints of this chapter, may condition any grant of approval upon the fulfillment of other reasonable conditions or requirements, and may attach a time period during which its grant of approval must be exercised, or expire. 
(5)  The FCBA shall render a decision and findings in writing to the fire chief, with a duplicate copy to the petitioner within 14 days of the public hearing. Decisions and findings in writing shall include signatures of a quorum of FCBA members. Failure of the FCBA to render a decision and findings in writing within 14 days of the public hearing shall constitute approval of the fire chief, or his/her designee's, original decision. 
(h)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the FCBA may petition the county board of commissioners for review to determine whether the FCBA's decision is arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. The petition is barred unless it is filed within 30 days of the date the FCBA adopts its written decision and findings. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Secs. 28-35—28-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ENTRANCE KEY LOCK BOX 

Sec. 28-71. - Purpose. 
Analysis and research shows when fires occur in buildings, the fire personnel are faced with entry into the structure. Entry into the structure, in some cases, must be made with force which is time consuming and demands extra energy by fire personnel. In order to expedite entry into a structure and to aid the fire personnel in the task of extinguishment, the following requirements in this article have been developed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-72. - Requirements. 
(a)  All new occupancies built after May 1, 1999 where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the fire marshal or his/her designee is authorized to require a key lockbox to be installed in an accessible location. The key lockbox shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain access to the structure or area as required by the fire marshal or his/her designee. A solid walking surface is required from any sidewalk to the key lockbox and such lockbox shall not be obstructed by tree, shrubs, fixtures, or the like. 
(b)  The following types of buildings or structures shall be equipped with a key lockbox to be located at or near the recognized public entrance, with such location to be approved by the fire marshal's or his/her designee: 
(1)  All commercial buildings; 
(2)  All industrial buildings; 
(3)  All multifamily buildings; 
(4)  All gated fire department access roadways, including but not limited to apartments, condominiums, and residential developments; and 
(5)  All hotels and motels. 
(c)  The key lockbox shall contain keys for the following and shall be labeled so as to be easily identifiable in the field by responding personnel: 
(1)  Keys to the locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of such structure; 
(2)  Keys to the locked mechanical rooms; 
(3)  Keys to the locked elevator rooms; 
(4)  Keys to the elevator controls; 
(5)  Keys to any fence or secured area; 
(6)  Keys to any alarm room area or any room where an alarm panel is installed; 
(7)  Keys to any alarm panels or alarm boxes; 
(8)  Keys or any additional special tools/items needed to reset pull stations; and 
(9)  Keys to any other area as directed by the Fire Marshal or his/her designee. 
(d)  The key lockbox shall be located at a height of not less than four feet and not more than 12 feet above final grade. Such key lockbox need not be supervised. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Secs. 28-73—28-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARD FOR RECOVERY OF EXPENDITURES RELATED TO PROVIDING SERVICES 

Sec. 28-91. - General requirements. 
(a)  All departments within the county government are hereby authorized to take appropriate steps to generate an invoice for services when, in their judgment, it was necessary to render the services in the best interest of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Services provided by the county may be the result of an accident, carelessness, willful intent, negligence, or failure to take actions that will eliminate reoccurring situations which adversely impact the county's cost of providing services and its ability to provide services for all citizens. 
(c)  In lieu of monetary reimbursement, the party receiving the services may replace supplies and equipment expended by the county with equal or greater quantities. Any such materials must be of equal or better specifications than that which was expended. This material reimbursement must be pre-approved by the department head of the department being reimbursed. 
(d)  Invoices shall be submitted to the county manager and/or the board of commissioners for approval prior to presenting the invoice to the party responsible for paying the reimbursement. An exception to this section will be the invoice procedures used by Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services involving hazardous materials incidents identified in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  During incidents involving a spill or the release of the hazardous material, Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services shall be allowed to submit invoices to the responsible party for paying the reimbursement. Approval by the fire chief or his/her designee shall be received prior to presenting the invoice to the party responsible for paying the reimbursement. 
(f)  The cost used to calculate the invoice amount shall be based on fair market values for the services, labor rates for county employees, advertised cost of goods and equipment, and the actual cost incurred. Compensation for overtime hours worked will be used in accordance with the county policy for such time. An exception to this will be hazardous materials incidents involving Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services. Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services cost recovery fee schedule for hazardous materials incidents shall be a flat rate of $500.00 per hour plus the actual replacement cost of all expendable equipment and goods used during the incident. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-92. - Preparing and submitting an invoice. 
(a)  Department instructions, standard operating procedures, and instructions as published and prepared by the finance department of the county shall be followed when preparing invoices and obtaining approvals. Department heads shall be responsible for determining when invoicing for reimbursement is appropriate. 
(b)  The finance department accounts receivable clerk shall be responsible for tracking the invoices and collecting the reimbursements. However, for hazardous materials invoices, the finance specialist for Cherokee County Fire and Emergency Services shall track such invoices and reimbursements to ensure that all such reimbursements are deposited by into the fire district's account. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 28-93. - Enforcement. 
Failure to reimburse the county as specified by the invoice shall be processed in accordance with the procedures of the finance department's accounts receivable section, policies, and rules. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-008, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Chapter 30 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-005, adopted July 7, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-88, and enacted a new Ch. 30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-O-002, §§ 1—8, adopted Sept. 5, 2006. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; road drainage code, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Cherokee County Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
The flood hazard areas of Cherokee County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, Cherokee County does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.2, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-4. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Cherokee County Engineer or the Cherokee County Engineering Department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.3, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-5. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. [For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Cherokee County, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto.] 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to Cherokee County, Georgia; and 
(b)  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to Cherokee County, Georgia; and 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.4, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-6. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.5, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-7. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.6, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Cherokee County, Georgia or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 1.7, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-9. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Adjacent to floodplain means those areas located within 15 horizontal feet from the future-conditions floodplain boundary. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Cherokee County Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Current model expands this definition. 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as "Structure." 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before February 9, 1976 [i.e., the effective date of the INITIAL floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 9, 1976 [i.e., the effective date of the INITIAL floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after February 9, 1976 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [* i.e., the effective date of the INITIAL floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 9, 1976 [* i.e., the effective date of the INITIAL floodplain management ordinance adopted by a community]. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Cherokee County Engineering Department to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 2, 7-7-15) 
Secs. 30-10—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 30-21. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Cherokee County Engineering Department a permit application on a form provided by the Cherokee County Engineering Department for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 3.1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-22. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 30-57(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 30-56(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, Special Flood Hazard Areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 3.2, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-23. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Cherokee County Engineer a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Cherokee County Engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 3.3, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-24. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Cherokee County Engineer shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of articles III and IV; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Cherokee County Engineer shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Cherokee County Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Cherokee County Engineer and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 3.4, 7-7-15) 
Secs. 30-25—30-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 30-36. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Cherokee County Engineering Department, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-37. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. If floodway data is not available from the Cherokee County Engineering Department, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.2, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-38. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any Area of Special Flood Hazard or Area of Future-conditions Flood Hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection (a) shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 30-39; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Cherokee County Engineering Department using the FEMA Community Concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.3, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-39. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.4, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-40. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Cherokee County Engineering Department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.5, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-41. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may direct the property owner (at no cost to Cherokee County Engineering Department) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 4.6, 7-7-15) 
Secs. 30-42—30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 30-56. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings—All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the Cherokee County Engineering Department, to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-57. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions, along with the provisions in section 30-56, apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Cherokee County Engineer, using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Cherokee County Engineer to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Cherokee County Engineer using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 30-56(5)a. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection (1)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(7). 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.2, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-58. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.3, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-59. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-Zones) 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the Cherokee County Engineer shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 30-56(5)a. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.4, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-60. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-56(5)a.; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the Cherokee County Engineer using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.5, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-61. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 30-22(2). 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 5.6, 7-7-15) 
Secs. 30-62—30-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 30-76. - [Variance and appeals procedures.] 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the Cherokee County Engineering Department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals as established by Cherokee County in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Cherokee County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Cherokee County Engineering Department and Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  a finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The Cherokee County Engineer shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Cherokee County, Georgia and (appointed board) shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Cherokee County Engineering Department and the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 6, 7-7-15) 
Secs. 30-77—30-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 30-86. - [General.] 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 7, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-87. - Notice of violation. 
If the Cherokee County Engineering Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Cherokee County Engineering Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 7.1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 30-88. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Cherokee County Engineering Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the Cherokee County Engineering Department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Cherokee County Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-005, § 7.2, 7-7-15) 
Chapter 32 - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 32-26. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Impact Fee Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia." 
(b)  Authority. 
(1)  This article has been prepared and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1 et seq., as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of Cherokee County, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(3)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Cherokee County, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-27. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia, finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Cherokee County. 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development. 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new land development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Cherokee County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Cherokee County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-8-1 et seq.) and the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-28. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Cherokee County. 
(b)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this article and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Cherokee County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. 
(2)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
(6)  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(7)  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(8)  The use of "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
(9)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(10)  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator means the appointed designee of the board of commissioners, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Building permit means the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling; rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Cherokee County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
Code enforcement officer means the employee or official who is designated and empowered to enforce the building codes of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Completion of construction means the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. The date of completion is the date on which such certificate is issued. 
Comprehensive plan means the Cherokee County Comprehensive Plan as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-8-1 et seq.) and the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
County means Cherokee County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action, which creates demand on, or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; and any change in use of land, a building, or structure. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, approval for connection to public utilities, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction or connection to public utilities. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Development impact fee appeals board means the board who is appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County to hear appeals or waiver requests. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities, which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Fee payer means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a fee payer or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds a majority interest in legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: 
(1)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights of way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any local components of state or federal highways; 
(2)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
(3)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; and 
(4)  Libraries and related facilities. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based. Such term includes but is not limited to, "housing unit," "acre of land," and "square feet of floor area." 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-29. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development as defined in this article shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(1)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this article, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this article that were destroyed by fire or other catastrophe on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
e.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
f.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(2)  Grand fathered projects. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(3)  Method of calculation. 
a.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of the present value of ad valorem tax or other revenues, if any, which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new development; and 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
c.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Cherokee County, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
d.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee shall also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
e.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-30. - Fee assessment and payment—Fee schedule. 
(a)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule incorporated into this article as Appendix A shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(c)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
(1)  The development impact fee appeals board shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee as an appeal. 
(2)  In making such determination, the development impact fee appeals board may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
(3)  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this article, then the board may add an appropriate new category. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-31. - Timing of assessment. 
(a)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit, as applicable. 
(b)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-32. - Individual assessment determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the development impact fee appeals board for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Cherokee County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(3)  The board of commissioners in its sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-33. - Timing of fee payment. 
(a)  All development impact fees shall be collected no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-34. - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees for categories of development or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00) 
Sec. 32-35. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of the system, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Cherokee County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
c.  Any portion of an impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Annual report. The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the board of commissioners as part of the annual audit or financial report describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(d)  Credits. When eligible, fee payers shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees due under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(e)  Credits; restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements to public facilities as defined herein, prior to the effective date of this article, is greater than the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Cherokee County, Georgia, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
(3)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements. 
(f)  Granting of credits. 
(1)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
(2)  Developers, who construct system improvements, privately or in conjunction with Cherokee County for which impact fees would otherwise be imposed, shall be entitled to a credit. The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall be equal to the present value of the cost of construction of the system improvement, up to a maximum of the impact fee due for such system improvement. In the event that a developer enters into an agreement with Cherokee County to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefitted by such improvements. 
(g)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by Cherokee County, Georgia, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the board of commissioners of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
(1)  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by Cherokee County, Georgia, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
(2)  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by Cherokee County, Georgia, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Cherokee County, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
(3)  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his predecessor in title or interest accepted by Cherokee County, Georgia, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
(4)  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(h)  Credits; application. 
(1)  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the board of commissioners. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the board of commissioners at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
(2)  The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
(3)  Any credit approved by the board of commissioners shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(4)  In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by Cherokee County, Georgia, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(i)  Establishment of development impact fee appeals board. There is hereby created a development impact fee appeals board consisting of five individuals appointed by the board of commissioners with each commissioner making one appointment. The term of the members of the development impact fee appeals board shall run concurrently with the term of the commissioner appointing. Said board shall hear appeals concerning the disputed amount of the impact fee and an individual assessment. Further, said board shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County as to whether fee payer may be entitled to a waiver, in whole or in part of the impact fee. 
(j)  Waivers and appeals. Pursuant to the public policies contained in the Cherokee County Comprehensive Plan, the board of commissioners may waive, in whole or in part, development impact fees for projects, upon recommendation by the development impact fee appeals board as provided hereafter on a case-by-case basis. 
(k)  Refunds—Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a fee payer or an owner of property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facility for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected, whichever first occurs. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(l)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the fee payer who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in Cherokee County within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "notice of entitlement to development impact fee refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(m)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of Cherokee County. 
(n)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the fee payer within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a fee payer be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or to recover the amount of funds expended by Cherokee County for system improvements for which the impact fee was collected, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(o)  Private contractual agreements. 
(1)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between Cherokee County, Georgia and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. 
(2)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
a.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow Cherokee County, Georgia to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this article. 
b.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
c.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit or other development approval. 
(3)  Private agreements; procedure. 
a.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. 
b.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit or other development approval. 
c.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(p)  Periodic review and amendments. 
(1)  Amendments. 
a.  This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Any such amendment to this article, including an amendment to the development impact fee schedule attached hereto as Appendix A, shall follow the procedures for adoption of an ordinance imposing a development impact fee as set out and required under the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1 et seq., as amended). 
b.  As part of its annual capital improvement program review process or at any other time, the board of commissioners may review the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, and may amend the capital improvements element, fee calculation methodology, or development impact fee schedule as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
(2)  Capital improvements element update. 
a.  No less often than once each year, the board of commissioners may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their records, in accordance with the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning, as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
b.  In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the board of commissioners may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
1.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
2.  Add new impact fee service areas or change the boundaries of existing impact fee service areas; or 
3.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area. 
(3)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
(q)  Administrative appeals. 
(1)  Eligibility to file a waiver or appeal. Only applicants or fee payers who have already been assessed an impact fee by Cherokee County, Georgia, or who have already received a written determination of refund or credit amount shall be entitled to file for a waiver or an appeal. 
(2)  Appeals and waiver process. 
a.  The aggrieved applicant or fee payer may file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee due, or entitlement to an amount of a refund or credit. Such written appeal shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought. 
b.  Within 30 days after receipt of the appeal, the development impact fee appeals board shall make a written decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
c.  The board of commissioners may hear an appeal, from the decision of the development impact fee appeals board, by filing such an appeal in writing within ten days after the decision of the development impact fee appeals board's decision. Should the board of commissioners determine to hear such appeal, it shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give written notice thereof to the applicant or fee payer, and decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
d.  Requests for waiver of development impact fees, in whole or in part, shall be made to the board for a recommendation. The board may recommend a waiver of said fees, in whole or in part, upon a finding that a development project is determined to create extraordinary economic development and employment growth or encourage affordable housing. Upon such recommendation, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, who shall accept, reject or modify said recommendation. Upon acceptance of a waiver of fees, in whole or in part, the board shall then allocate from fund sources, the necessary funds to the impact fee program to provide for the fee so waived. 
(3)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
a.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of a building permit or other development approval. 
b.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit or other development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(r)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Enforcement authority. 
a.  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
b.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. 
c.  The administrator may withhold the issuance of any building permit or other development approval if the owner or his assigns have violated the provisions of this article. 
d.  For any violation, the administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(2)  Violations. 
a.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. 
b.  A violation of this article shall be punishable as contained in section 1-12 of this Code and as according to state law. However, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(s)  Repealer, severability, and effective date. 
(1)  Repeal of conflicting laws. Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(2)  Severability. If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this article is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the article as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(3)  Incorporation by reference of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71. It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, Georgia, that the "Impact Fee Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia" comply with the terms and provisions of the "Georgia Development Impact Fee Act," O.C.G.A. § 36-71. Therefore, O.C.G.A. § 36-71 is incorporated by reference into this article. To the extent that any provision of this article is inconsistent with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this article is silent as to any provision of O.C.G.A. § 36-71 that is otherwise deemed mandatory by law, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the county. 
(4)  Effective date. 
a.  This article shall take effect on Monday, the 1st day of May, 2000. 
b.  Any building for which a valid application for a building permit (or, if no building permit is required, other appropriate development approval) has been received prior to the effective date of this article may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 
1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and 
2.  Said development approval is issued within 90 calendar days of the effective date of this article; and 
3.  Said construction or connection to public utilities shall have been completed within the time established by the development approval. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-2, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2000-O-5, 6-27-00) 
APPENDIX A. - IMPACT FEES SCHEDULE 
CHEROKEE COUNTY IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-004, Exh., 7-21-09; Ord. No. 2011-O-004, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2013-O-002, Exh. 1, 7-16-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-004, adopted February 15, 2011, provided for an effective date for the impact fee schedule of August 1, 2011. The ordinance also provided the following: "Those persons holding a building permit on August 1, 2011, who seek to renew or extend the time to complete work so authorized under said permit, but have not passed an inspection of the foundation for the structure, in addition to any renewal fee of the building permit, will be required to pay additional impact fees equal to 50 percent of the impact fee assessed for such structure; and, as of August 1, 2012, those persons holding a building permit who seek to renew or extend the time to complete work so authorized under said permit, but have not passed an inspection of the foundation for the structure, in addition to any renewal fee of the building permit, will be required to pay additional impact fees equal to 100 percent of the impact fee assessed for such structure." 
Chapter 34 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day; police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special police officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1; county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq.; torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 

Sec. 34-1. - County marshal. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of county marshal. 
(b)  The county marshal, personally or by and through designees of the county marshal, is charged with authority to enforce all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the county, by the use of county citations, and to return such violations to the magistrate's court of the county for proper trial and sentencing, and to otherwise enforce county ordinances and perform the duties of marshals and constables as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 91-4, §§ 1—3, 6-28-91; Ord. No. 96-12, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-12, adopted August 13, 1996, amended § 34-1 to read as herein follows. Formerly, such section pertained to county police force. 
Sec. 34-2. - Duties and responsibilities of the county marshal. 
(a)  Duties and responsibilities. The primary duties and responsibilities of the county marshal shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners; 
(2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violation, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances; 
(3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations; 
(4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations; 
(5)  To appear and testify in court; 
(6)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary; 
(7)  To ensure proper collection of fines; 
(8)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with the agencies, departments and divisions of Cherokee County as may be deemed necessary; and 
(9)  Perform any other lawful duties required by the county manager and/or the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-005, exh. A, 8-2-16) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Indecent entertainment, conduct or attire in establishments selling or allowing alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Findings of fact; purpose. Based upon the experiences of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb and Cobb County, Georgia; Seattle and Renton, Washington; New York, New York; Los Angeles, California; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida; which experiences the board of commissioners believes are relevant to the problems faced by the county, and based upon the evidence and testimony of the citizens and experts who have appeared before such bodies, the board of commissioners takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity and semi-nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called nude bars or establishments offering so-called nude entertainment, adult entertainment or erotic entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this subsection, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or semi-nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow or encourage nudity or semi-nudity. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are not permitted upon premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages, or upon premises licensed under the business and occupational ordinances of the county and in which alcoholic beverages are consumed, allowed or dispensed on the premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals; 
(2)  Live entertainment in business establishments which provides or features nude or semi-nude or erotic dancing, or the performance of obscene acts or acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproduction depicting any of the acts described in subsection (2) of this subsection which are obscene under state law; or 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct prohibited in this section. 
(c)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsection (b) of this section, nothing in this section shall or is intended to apply to theatrical or motion picture performance houses, museums or the like where the consumption or service of alcohol is not a primary purpose or mainstream activity of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, §§ 1, 2, 5-22-91) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; prohibited conduct on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq. 
Sec. 38-2. - Domestic affray. 
(a)  A domestic affray is the fighting of two or more persons on private property (1) to the disturbance of the public tranquility or (2) in the presence of minors. 
(b)  A person who commits the offense of domestic affray shall be punished as provided by section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County. 
(c)  The sheriff of the county is authorized to enforce this section and any case shall be tried in the state court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 38-3. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Alarm means any signal (audio or visually, recorded or live) transmitted to the county, indicating a predetermined condition exists when said alarm is received either: 
(1)  By telephone line to a designated position on an alarm panel; 
(2)  By a private alarm service company relayed to the 911 Communications Center telephone; 
(3)  By an automated telephone alarm system, playing a recorded message when received on the 911 communications center telephone; or 
(4)  By an audible/visual signal relayed to the 911 communications center by a third party. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system where none of the emergencies for which the alarm system has been installed, have in fact occurred. 
Telephone alarm system means any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephone instrument at the 911 communications center. Such system must be totally automated and require no relaying or action by a human being. 
Response means the dispatch of any law enforcement or fire unit to the premises where an alarm has been activated. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery, burglary, or fire alarm except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary, robbery or fire. It shall be unlawful for anyone to notify the county of an activated alarm with the knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the system or by lack of adequate maintenance of the alarm system without at the same time notifying the law enforcement of such apparent malfunctions. All alarm systems shall be installed as per NFPA 72 and any reference codes that apply to NFPA 72. 
(c)  Service fees imposed. 
(1)  For each fire response to a false alarm, a report shall be made and forwarded to the fire marshal's office. The fire marshal shall take the following actions: 
a.  For the first false alarm from a premises within a six-month period, the fire marshal shall forward to the property owner or premises lessee a copy of the report, a copy of this chapter, and a statement that continued false alarms will lead to a service fee; 
b.  For the second false alarm from a premises within a 12-month period, the fire marshal shall cause the alarm system to be inspected by a state licensed alarm low voltage contractor and to prescribe necessary corrective action; 
c.  For the third false alarm within a 12-month period, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a fee of $50.00; and 
d.  For the fourth false alarm and all succeeding alarms within a 12-month period, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a fee up to $1,000.00 per alarm and each additional alarm thereafter. 
e.  For cases which need immediate action with more than ten alarms the fire marshal shall have the authority to cease business activity with a 24-hour notice. 
(2)  The marshal's office or his designee shall be responsible for issuing citations for fees imposed. 
(3)  The false alarm shall not be considered for purposes of assessing a fee if: 
a.  Within ten days from the occurrence of a false alarm, the owner or lessee of the premises can demonstrate to the fire marshal, as applicable, that the alarm system in question has actually been examined by an authorized repair service who certifies in writing that the system is currently in good working order; provided, however, no more than one letter may be submitted by an owner or lessee within a six month period in order to avoid a fee assessment; 
b.  The false alarm was not caused by employee error at a business location; 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than one such letter may be submitted by an owner or lessee of a premises within a 12-month period in order to avoid a fee assessment as provided by this subsection; 
d.  The alarm was activated by inclement weather. 
(Ord. No. 00-O-1, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 38-4. - Swimming pools; nuisances and hazards prohibited. 
(a)  Swimming pool is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth of any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment. Such swimming pools may be either private or public. 
(b)  No swimming pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, hazard, eyesore, or otherwise to result in a substantial adverse affect on the neighboring properties, or to be in any other way detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2001-016, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 38-5. - All-terrain vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings as set out herein: 
All-terrain vehicles (ATV) means a self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for operation over natural terrain and steered by wheels, to specifically include, but not be limited to, off-road motorcycles, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, and all other such vehicles with one or more wheels. The term "ATV" is not intended to include bicycles or street legal vehicles operating on public road right-of-ways. 
ATV trails mean the property designated and posted for lawful, authorized use by ATVs. 
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV. 
Operator means every person who operates an ATV. 
Owner means a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a right of use regarding, property interest in or title to an ATV and entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity whether incorporated or not. 
Public road right-of-way means the entire right-of-way of a public road, street or highway, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to limit the use of ATVs within unincorporated Cherokee County. 
(c)  Unlawful operation. Unless otherwise noted, it is unlawful for any person to operate an ATV: 
(1)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or cause injury or damage to any person or property. 
(2)  So as to tow any person or thing on a public road right-of-way. 
(3)  In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual and unreasonable noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. Such sound that is plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet from the origin of sound shall be presumed to be a violation of this provision. Additionally, it shall be presumed to be a violation of this provision if an individual rides an ATV continuously past, around, or near an inhabited dwelling place so as to disturb or unduly annoy the inhabitants. 
(4)  On airport property. 
(5)  On private property without the express permission to do so by the owner and occupant of the property. 
(6)  On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses, cemeteries or any other public places, except on posted "ATV trail" locations, unless the operator has the express permission of the proper public authority. 
(7)  On United States Department of the Army Corp of Engineers property, unless the operator has the express written permission of the Allatoona Operations Project Manager, which such written permission shall be carried on the person of the permitee at all times during operation of the ATV on such property. 
(8)  On any portion of any public road right-of-way. 
(d)  Age restrictions. No person shall operate an ATV in violation of the age requirements established by Georgia State law. 
(e)  Organized events. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of ATVs within the county in organized events, provided the event organization and property owner do not object to such use. 
(f)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Motorboats; 
(2)  Any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; 
(3)  Any vehicles used exclusively on airports; 
(4)  Any farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, and for like activities; and 
(5)  Self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes and used in a location consistent with their designed purpose. However, golf carts when used as a means of logistical transport are not included within this exception. 
(g)  Additional requirements. This subsection (g) shall apply to the operation of ATVs that are otherwise operating in compliance with the ordinance from which this section derives: 
(1)  No ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(2)  The operator of an ATV shall make every effort to be visible to oncoming traffic from any direction. 
(h)  Penalties. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be subject to issuance of a citation, and if proven guilty before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-003, § 1, 9-2-08) 
Sec. 38-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve the peace and tranquility of the public sector when it is endangered by the irresponsible actions of a person. The goal of this section is to empower the Cherokee Sheriff's Office and the Cherokee Marshal's Office to issue citations to those persons who, in the sound judgment of such law enforcement officials, are acting irrationally, who are under mental and/or emotional strain, who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or who are creating a disturbance which interferes with the lawful movement or actions of the general public. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance that is contrary to the peace and tranquility enjoyed by the people, interfere with the lawful movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or to engage in any of the following acts: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or argumentative and threatening manner to another person whereby that person is placed in fear of bodily harm or the property of another is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(2)  Any person who initiates or engages or provokes any fight or affray so as to cause injury to another's person or property. 
(3)  Any person who acts in a violent or disruptive manner through use of obscene language or words considered profane, fighting words, vulgar and/or indecent language, in any place, public or private, where such language is offensive to the surrounding public, and where the use of such language may be a breach of peace and/or potentially dangerous to the safety of persons and property. 
(4)  Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(5)  Any person who engages in any noisy, boisterous, or unruly conduct that disturbs or infringes upon the peace of another particularly at an hour or time which is not common for such activity. 
(6)  Any persons who assemble or congregate for any purpose other than a lawful or reasonable one; that hinder vehicular or pedestrian movements; or who may roughly crowd, push or shove any persons in any public place; or who refuse the request by a law enforcement officer to disperse. 
(7)  Any person who with intent to riot does an act or engages in conduct which urges, counsels, or advises others to riot, at a time and place and under circumstances which produce a clear and present danger of riot. 
Any singular or combined presence of the act enumerated in this subsection may constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of such ordinance and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-009, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 38-7. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a)  Unlawful assembly. It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons, after having assembled on private property of any person, firm, corporation, and/or entity within Cherokee County in the absence of, and without first having obtained the permission of the owner, tenant in possession, or person in charge of such private property to assemble thereon, to fail to disperse and cease such assembly upon being directed to do so by any deputy, marshal, or other authorized law enforcement officer of Cherokee County. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of such ordinance and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-009, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 38-8. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when said person intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is $500.00 or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she knowingly and without authority: 
(1)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3)  Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor who is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of such ordinance and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-009, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Secs. 38-9—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWN SHOPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, adopted Apr. 19, 2011, amended Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 38-31—38-55, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-2, §§ 1—25, adopted Feb. 8, 1994. 

Sec. 38-31. - Purpose; authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, and establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of pawnbrokers or similar places where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135. The requirements of this article shall be cumulative to the requirements of Title 44, Chapter 12, Article 3, Part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-32. - Compliance with article required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating as a pawnbroker, as herein defined, shall first file an application with the county development service center for a permit to conduct such business, shall receive such permit, and shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-33. - Territorial applicability of article. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all unincorporated portions of Cherokee County, except as provided for in section 38-55 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-34. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this article. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property (other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness), including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this article, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with the law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-35. - Application. 
All persons 21 years of age or older desiring to obtain a permit required under this article shall make written application to the county development service center upon forms to be prepared by the county development service center. Such application shall state the name and the address of the applicant, the place where the proposed business is to be located, the nature and character of the business to be carried on, if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders, if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a limited liability company, the names of the members, and such other information as may be required by the county development service center, all sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Permitted businesses will be required to also comply with the occupation tax requirements of chapter 18, article II of the County Code. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-42 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-36. - Background investigation. 
All persons filing an application for an initial permit or the renewal of a permit, as well as all proposed employees at the time of such application of any pawnbroker, shall complete a waiver in order to be checked by the state crime information center or by other criminal background verification methods to determine their record of any arrests and/or convictions on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-37. - Citizenship. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted hereunder to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, at least one general partner must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, at least one member must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-38. - Issuance of permits to persons with prior convictions prohibited; exceptions. 
No permit hereunder shall be issued to any person convicted of a felony, which includes, but is not limited to, burglary, theft by receiving stolen property, or any crime involving moral turpitude, unless said person has had their rights restored, in which event they must provide to the county development service center documentation confirming the restoration of their rights. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt by admission, conviction or otherwise, a plea of "nolo contendere" or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-39. - General information; application restrictions. 
No application for any permit hereunder shall be granted where the application shows or the county development service center finds any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has previously had any pawnbroker permit issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant, as the previous holder of a permit to operate as a pawnbroker, has been convicted of violating any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business within a one-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has supplied false information upon his application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee or tax owed to the county. 
The permit shall be issued: if an individual or sole proprietorship, to the individual; if a corporation, to the corporation and the majority stockholder; if a partnership, to the partnership and all partners; if a limited liability company, to the limited liability company and all members. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-40. - Transfers. 
No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable, except upon application to the county development service center in the same form, manner and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. When permission for transfer has been granted, either the original permittee or the transferee shall cause the permit to be delivered to the county development service center, who shall record such transfer and provide the permit to the transferee, and the transferee shall pay the fee required for an original permit as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the permit. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit transfer within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-42 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-41. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
Subject to the provisions of the following section 38-42, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke, or place on probation (either with or without conditions), any permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-42. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  No permit issued under this article shall be suspended (except as provided for in subsection (b)), revoked, or placed on probation, except for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof, and after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon reasonable notice to the permittee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and of the reason why the permit should be suspended or revoked. At least seven days written notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(b)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend a permit immediately or give seven days written notice that such permit is subject to suspension when there is cause to believe that grounds exist for suspending the permit prior to the conduct of a hearing before the board of commissioners. This action shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting, or, at the request of the permittee, a special meeting of the board of commissioners may be called within seven days after such request is filed with the county development service center, and the board of commissioners may either affirm or overturn the suspension after the hearing of evidence. A permit shall not be revoked or placed on probation, except upon action by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or placement on probation of any permit shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any law, regulation, ordinance, or resolution regulating the permittee. 
(2)  The permittee's provision of false information to the county development service center, regardless of when the county development service center shall have become aware of the falsity of such information. 
(3)  The permittee has failed to obtain, or has suffered suspension or revocation of, any paper, permit or other document necessary in pursuance of its business, as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the county, state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may specify conditions of operation of the permit holder during any period of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the county development service center. No probation shall extend over a period of more than 12 consecutive calendar months. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-43. - Permit fees to be set by board of commissioners; refund. 
(a)  The original permit fee and annual renewal permit fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for less than a calendar year period, and in cases of the revocation, suspension or surrender of such permit before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever of all or any portion of the permit fee. 
(c)  All permits shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1, and the fee prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit fee shall be prorated for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year, and the full amount of the annual permit fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be payable for any business, whether commenced on or after January 1 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-44. - Permit to authorize conduct of one place of business. 
Each permit issued hereunder shall authorize the conduct of business at one location only, and persons doing business at more than one location within the county shall obtain a separate permit, requiring a separate fee, for each such location. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-45. - Change of location. 
Any person moving a business permitted hereunder from one location to another shall notify the county development service center of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the county development service center, no later than within one day of moving. A new permit shall be issued upon payment of a reasonable fee if the new location conforms to all applicable ordinances, resolutions, and the county's zoning and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-46. - Permit to be displayed. 
All permits issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business for which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-47. - Time limit for commencement of business in permitted establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of permits hereunder must, within three months after approval of the permit, open for business the establishment referred to in the permit, unless a time extension is granted by the board of commissioners. Failure to open the permitted establishment within such three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused permit, and no refund of permit fees shall be made to the permit holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a permit hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the permit, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the permit, shall upon completion of such three-month period automatically forfeit the permit, which permit shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any action of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-48. - Renewal. 
Any pawnbroker permitted under this article shall register with the county development service center, apply for renewal of the existing permit, and pay the annual permit renewal fee no later than February 15 of each calendar year in which it does business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-49. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the articles pledged with or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-50. - Consignment sales prohibited. 
Under no circumstances will any pawnbroker receive articles from another individual for the purpose of selling the article for the individual and remitting a portion of the sale prices to said individual. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-51. - Pawn tickets and daily reports. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers will make daily reports to the sheriff's office in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers shall capture an image, with a digital camera, of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the article. The image shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. 
The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the article. 
The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any article. 
(d)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of acquisition of any article and of the article's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. 
If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(e)  All persons who enter a pawnbroker business and attempt to sell or pawn an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States driver's license, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(f)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, shall be made by the pawnbroker and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(g)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the pawnbroker's possession. 
(h)  To the extent that the pawnbroker utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-52. - Pawned merchandise not to be disposed of for forty days. 
(a)  Regarding any and all articles not redeemed by the person who pawned the article by the maturity date (30 days), the pawnbroker must hold the pawned article for an additional ten-day grace period before disposing of the article or placing the article in public view for sale. 
(b)  In the event the pawnbroker purchases the article instead of the pledge, then the pawnbroker is required to hold the article for 30 days before disposing of the article or placing the article in public view for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-53. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge or sale, goods of any character or description from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-54. - Employees to be fingerprinted and identification displayed. 
As explained in section 38-36, the applicant as well as its employees shall complete a basic criminal background check. If approved by the county development service center, the applicant and each of its employees will receive an identification card. This identification card will include a photo, their name and the name of the business. An employee identification card shall be required for any employee of a pawnbroker and may be denied for any of the reasons (excepting citizenship) that a pawnbroker permit may be denied to an applicant under this article. 
Prospective employees may appeal the denial of an employee identification card within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-42 above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 38-55. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. This article shall not apply to incorporated portions of the county, unless it is expressly adopted by the applicable local municipal governing authority. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173(b), weapons shall not be regulated pursuant to this article. However, pawnbrokers must comply with all requirements, including but not limited to record-keeping requirements for weapons as specified in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132, of Title 44, Chapter 12, Article 3, Part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and shall be subject to all applicable criminal penalties under state law for any violation of same. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 2017-O-002, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 38-56. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the magistrate court of Cherokee County, Georgia and shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided for in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-005, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Secs. 38-57—38-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 38-60. - Parking regulations upon county property. 
(a)  Parking. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13, it shall be unlawful to park upon any county property inclusive of any and all parking lots and other areas designated by proper signage as no parking or reserved for specific uses. 
(b)  Signage. The director of public works, the director of buildings and grounds, and the county manager are hereby designated as those persons authorized by the board to instruct the placement of appropriate signage prohibiting parking and/or informing the public of the person or firm removing and storing any such vehicle and information as to where the vehicle or trespassing personal property can be recovered. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person violating this code section shall be subject to a citation by the county marshal or the sheriff's office returnable to the magistrate court of Cherokee County and subject to a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 60 days' imprisonment. In addition to a citation, any vehicle found to be parked in violation of this article shall be subject to impoundment at the vehicle owner's sole expense by Cherokee County or by a private towing company to a private impound lot. The vehicle owner shall be responsible for all towing expenses and charges incurred for towing the vehicle and all accrued daily impoundment storage fees. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-005, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 2017-O-006, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 38-61. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No parking. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portions thereof as indicated by such signs. The county may designate such areas in the county as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public as no parking areas by placing signs within the restricted areas of such streets and roads where it is determined that the same poses a serious threat to vehicular users or pedestrian traffic. In addition, no vehicle shall be allowed to stop; stand or park in areas prohibited in specified places as more specifically set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203 or other applicable provisions of state law. 
(b)  Restricted areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the following streets and highways within the county except for emergency purposes, to wit: 
•  Myrtle Road 
•  Aspen Lane 
•  Acacia Lane 
•  Oak Drive 
•  Fields Landing Drive 
•  Linden Lane 
(c)  Emergency defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "emergency" means any mechanical or human failure which would make it unsafe for the vehicle or its driver to continue operating the vehicle or stopping to assist a disabled vehicle or person except when having been told to move on by a law enforcement official. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating this code section shall be subject to a citation by the county marshal or the sheriffs office returnable to the magistrate court of Cherokee County and subject to a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 60 days' imprisonment. In addition to a citation, any vehicle found to be parked in violation of this article shall be subject to impoundment at the vehicle owner's sole expense by Cherokee County or by a private towing company to a private impound lot. The vehicle owner shall be responsible for all towing expenses and charges incurred for towing the vehicle and all accrued daily impoundment storage fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-006, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Secs. 38-62—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOITERING, SOLICITING, PANHANDLING 

Sec. 38-81. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person may not loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in a manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress. 
(b)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place by the county sheriff's office and/or any other authorized law enforcement official. 
(c)  A person shall not sit, lie, or sleep in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk or other place open for pedestrian travel, except when necessitated by temporary physical disability of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 38-82. - Loitering by minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a minor, as defined herein, to loiter in any public place within the county between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, subject to the definitions and exceptions contained in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Loiter means to stand idly about or linger aimlessly. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, malls, parking lots, office buildings, playgrounds, vacant lots and transportation facilities. 
Youth means any person under the age of 18 and is synonymous with the terms "juvenile" or "minor" for the purposes of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to minors under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Individuals emancipated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 19-7-1 et. seq., or similar statutes of another state; 
(2)  Individuals accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of said minor; 
(3)  Upon a specific, legitimate errand at the direction of a parent or guardian having the care or custody of a minor, while such minor is actually and directly carrying out such errand; 
(4)  Going directly to or coming directly from a place of public amusement, school function, or place of employment, with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian; 
(5)  Individuals present in a public place because of an emergency, as defined herein, while actually dealing with or responding to such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 2, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 38-83. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Solicit or panhandle shall mean to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(2)  Public area shall mean an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor within any public area in Cherokee County or: 
a.  In any public transportation vehicle, or public transportation station or stop; 
b.  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
c.  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
d.  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for services or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(2)  Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Aggressive panhandling shall mean and include: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to, or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm, or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to, or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued, pursuant to county ordinance, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to, or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to, or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(7)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated misdemeanor. 
(d)  Applicability. This section regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. This section does not apply to solicitations by permitted charitable organizations as provided for below. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 3, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 38-84. - Charitable solicitations. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person soliciting funds on the roads and highways within the unincorporated portions of Cherokee County shall have a permit issued by the governing authority of Cherokee County. 
(b)  Eligibility. Permits shall only be issued to those persons or organizations which are "charitable organizations" registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, or "charitable organizations" exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
(c)  Application. Applicants for charitable solicitation permits shall make application online with the Cherokee County Marshal's Office, and shall provide the following information at the time of their application: 
(1)  Safety plans detailing safety measures to be utilized during solicitation; 
(2)  The site of any proposed solicitation and traffic plans which indicate that their proposed solicitation will not hinder the free and orderly flow of traffic on the roads and highways in Cherokee County; 
(3)  List of names, dates of birth, next of kin, emergency contact numbers, and address of each individual who will participate in the proposed solicitation; 
(4)  Insurance information on the individuals and the organization which will participate in the solicitation; 
(5)  A statement under oath that the organization is a "charitable organization" and that all proceeds raised will be used for the benefit of citizens to include those of the county; and 
(6)  The dates and times proposed for the solicitation. 
(d)  Issuance. Permits shall only be issued by the marshal's office if he or she finds that the applicant is qualified and that the proposed solicitation shall not: 
(1)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the county; 
(2)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the people participating in the solicitation; and 
(3)  Hinder the free flow of traffic on the roads and highways of the county. 
(e)  No one under the age of 18 without adult supervision shall solicit funds in any way from the right-of-way or driving surface of any road of highway in the county. 
(f)  Solicitation permits must be available for inspection at the site of the solicitation upon the request of any law enforcement officer. 
(g)  All persons participating in the solicitation of funds shall wear orange safety vests at all times while located in the roads and rights-of-way of the county. 
(h)  Permits are valid for seven calendar days. 
(i)  Variances to time limits for charitable solicitation permits shall only be granted by a majority vote of the board of commissioners after a showing by the applicant of the necessity of a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 4, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 38-85. - Urban camping. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Camp shall mean residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private primary living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
(2)  Storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(3)  Public park includes all public parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
(4)  Public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined above, owned by the county, unless specifically authorized. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street, as defined above. 
(d)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he or she has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest. 
(f)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 5, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 38-86. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon the first violation of any of the provisions of the loitering ordinance from which this article derives, a warning citation shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon the second violation of any of the provisions of the loitering ordinance from which this article derives, a citation shall be issued and the individual will go before the Cherokee County Magistrate Court. 
(c)  Upon conviction, punishment shall be as set forth by the magistrate court. Such punishment may include the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance and as such state law may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  For sentencing purposes, the first citation before the magistrate court shall be deemed the "first offense"; however, consideration may be given by the court to the previous warning citation. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall restrict the county from pursuing other means of enforcement as it deems necessary, including instituting appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity with a court of competent jurisdiction. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. 
(f)  Every violation and each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-001, § 6, 3-18-08) 
Secs. 38-87—38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 38-101. - Purpose; authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. The requirements of this article shall be in addition to those requirements contained in Title 43, Chapter 37 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-102. - Compliance with article required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a dealership in precious metals and gems, as herein defined, shall first file an application with the county development service center for a permit to conduct such business, shall receive such permit, and shall comply with all requirements of this article. This article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-103. - Territorial applicability of article. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all unincorporated portions of Cherokee County, except as provided in section 38-123 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-104. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this article. 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
"Dealer" is not intended to apply to any person engaged in the acceptance of precious metals or gems on a consignment basis where there is no payment for acceptance of the precious metal or gem until such time as an end-user purchases the item from the person engaged in the consignment business. 
Gems mean any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-105. - Application. 
All persons 21 years of age or older desiring to obtain a permit required under this article shall make written application to the county development service center upon forms to be prepared by the county development service center. Such application shall state the name and the address of the applicant, the place where the proposed business is to be located, the nature and character of the business to be carried on, if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders, if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a limited liability company, the names of the members, and such other information as may be required by the county development service center, all sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Permitted businesses will be required to comply with the occupation tax requirements of chapter 18, article 2 of the County Code. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-110 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-106. - Citizenship. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted hereunder to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, at least one general partner must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, at least one member must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-107. - General information; application restrictions. 
No application for any permit hereunder shall be granted where the application shows or the county development service center finds any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has previously had any dealer's permit issued by any county, municipality or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant, as the previous holder of a permit to operate as a dealer, has been convicted of violating any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business within a one-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has supplied false information upon his application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee or tax owed to the county. 
The permit shall be issued: if an individual or sole proprietorship, to the individual; if a corporation, to the corporation and the majority stockholder; if a partnership, to the partnership and all partners; if a limited liability company, to the limited liability company and all members. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-108. - Transfers. 
No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable except upon application to the county development service center in the same form, manner and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. When permission for transfer has been granted, either the original permitee or the transferee shall cause the permit to be delivered to the county development service center, who shall record such transfer and provide the permit to the transferee, and the transferee shall pay the fee required for an original permit as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the permit. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit transfer within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-110 below. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-109. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
Subject to the provisions of the following section 38-110, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke, or place on probation (either with or without conditions), any permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-110. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  No permit issued under this article shall be suspended (except as provided for in subsection (b)), revoked, or placed on probation, except for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof, and after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon reasonable notice to the permitee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and of the reason why the permit should be suspended or revoked. At least seven days written notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(b)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend a permit immediately or give seven days written notice that such permit is subject to suspension when there is cause to believe that grounds exist for suspending the permit prior to the conduct of a hearing before the board of commissioners. This action shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting, or, at the request of the permitee, a special meeting of the board of commissioners may be called within seven days after such request is filed with the county development service center, and the board of commissioners may either affirm or overturn the suspension after the hearing of evidence. A permit shall not be revoked or placed on probation except upon action by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or placement on probation of any permit shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any law, regulation, ordinance, or resolution regulating the permitee. 
(2)  The permitee's provision of false information to the county development service center, regardless of when the county development service center shall have become aware of the falsity of such information. 
(3)  The permitee has failed to obtain, or has suffered suspension or revocation of any paper, permit or other document necessary in pursuance of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the county, state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may specify conditions of operation of the permit holder during any period of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the county development service center. No probation shall extend over a period of more than 12 consecutive calendar months. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-111. - Permit fees to be set by board of commissioners; refund. 
(a)  The original permit fee and annual renewal permit fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for less than a calendar year period, and in cases of the revocation, suspension or surrender of such permit before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever of all or any portion of the permit fee. 
(c)  All permits shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1, and the fee prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit fee shall be prorated for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year, and the full amount of the annual permit fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be payable for any business, whether commenced on or after January 1 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-112. - Permit to authorize conduct of one place of business. 
Each permit issued hereunder shall authorize the conduct of business at one location only, and persons doing business at more than one location within the county shall obtain a separate permit, requiring a separate fee, for each such location. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-113. - Change of location. 
Any person moving a business permitted hereunder from one location to another shall notify the county development service center of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the county development service center, no later than within one day of moving. A new permit shall be issued upon payment of a reasonable fee if the new location conforms to all applicable ordinances, resolutions, and the county's zoning and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-114. - Permit to be displayed. 
All permits issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business for which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-115. - Time limit for commencement of business in permitted establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of permits hereunder must, within three months after approval of the permit, open for business the establishment referred to in the permit unless a time extension is granted by the board of commissioners. 
Failure to open the permitted establishment within such three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused permit, and no refund of permit fees shall be made to the permit holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a permit hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the permit, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the permit, shall upon completion of such three-month period automatically forfeit the permit, which permit shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any action of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-116. - Renewal. 
Any dealer permitted under this article shall register with the county development service center, apply for renewal of the existing permit, and pay the annual permit renewal fee no later than February 15 of each calendar year in which it does business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-117. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All dealers shall keep books in compliance with state law wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a dealer, who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the articles sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-118. - Reporting. 
(a)  Dealers will make daily reports to the sheriff's office in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  The dealer shall obtain from each person selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. 
In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any article. 
(c)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of acquisition of any article and of the article's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(d)  All persons who enter a dealership and attempt to sell an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States Drivers License, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(e)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, shall be made by the dealer and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(f)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person selling the precious metal or gem to the dealer, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the dealer's possession. 
(g)  To the extent that a dealer utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-119. - Precious metals/gems not to be disposed of for 30 days. 
Dealers must hold all precious metals and gems for 30 days prior to sale, assignment, trading, or other disposal of same. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-120. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer, his agents or employees, to receive gems or precious metals from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-121. - Identification cards to be displayed. 
If approved by the county development service center, the applicant and each of its employees will receive an identification card. This identification card will include a photo, their name and the name of the business. An employee identification card shall be required for any employee of a dealer and may be denied for any of the reasons (excepting citizenship) that a dealer permit may be denied to an applicant under this article. Prospective employees may appeal the denial of an employee identification card within 30 days in writing to the county development service center, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 38-110 above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-122. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. This article shall not apply to incorporated portions of the county, unless it is expressly adopted by the applicable local municipal governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Sec. 38-123. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the dealer or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the Magistrate Court of Cherokee County, Georgia and shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided for in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-006, § 1, 5-17-11) 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; environment, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-003, adopted June 16, 2015, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 42-36—42-42, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 18, 1987, §§ 1—7. 

Sec. 42-36. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Cherokee County Ordinance for the Use of Parks and Recreational Facilities." 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Director means the Director of the Cherokee Recreation and Parks Agency. 
Director's authorized agent means employees and agents of the Cherokee Recreation and Parks Agency authorized to act on behalf of the director of the Cherokee Recreation and Parks Agency. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
E-cigarette(s) means any electronic oral device, such as one consisting of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that produces an aerosol mist or vapor, the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term "vaping" shall mean the use of an e-cigarette or inhalation of the vaporized contents of an e-cigarette. 
Park and recreation facility means all Cherokee County public parks and recreation areas in such parks including the land, buildings, lakes, ponds, streams, swimming pools, and all other property and buildings owned, leased, or managed by Cherokee County and the Cherokee Recreation and Parks Agency within said parks and recreation facilities. 
All references to masculine pronouns shall be construed to be gender neutral. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-38. - Enforcement of the article. 
This article may be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of Cherokee County. Where there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the law enforcement officer in his discretion may issue a citation, warning and/or order the person to the leave the park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-39. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Cherokee County Code of Ordinances, except that the maximum fine for littering shall be $1,000.00 for each such conviction. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be denied any park permit or other permission to utilize the facilities of any park or recreation facility for a period of no less than 60 days following said conviction including but not limited to the rental of athletic fields, pavilions, rental of other recreation facilities, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-40. - Application and issuance of permits. 
(a)  Permits for restricted uses or activities in a park or recreation facility shall be obtained by application to the director or the director's authorized agent. Upon examination of the application and all other relevant factors, the director or the director's authorized agent shall approve and issue or deny the permit. 
(b)  The director or the director's authorized agent shall have the authority to revoke any permit if the permittee is found to be in violation of any park rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-41. - Alcohol possession and consumption and drug use. 
No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in the laws of this state, in any park or recreation facility, nor shall any person use or possess any drug or any other controlled substance, as defined in the laws of this state, except as lawfully permitted by the laws of this state, in any park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-42. - Animal control in parks. 
Domestic animals, as defined in this article, are permitted within a park or recreation facility with the following restrictions. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every domestic animal owner or custodian of such animal to have physical control of the animal by leash no longer than six feet at all times and under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the domestic animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary or securely enclosed in a locked cage, crate or pet carrier suitable for the domestic animal's size within a park or recreation facility where animals are permitted, except in fenced areas designated by the county where domestic animals are expressly permitted to be off of a leash. 
(2)  Other than service animals as necessary, or unless authorized by permit, it shall be unlawful for any person with a domestic animal to access areas of a park or recreation facility which are restricted to such animals. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of every domestic animal owner or custodian of such animal to immediately and properly dispose of waste deposited by the animal while in a park or recreation facility. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of every domestic animal owner or custodian of such animal in a park or recreation facility to have in his or her possession proof of a current rabies vaccination for the animal. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of every domestic animal owner or custodian of such animal in a park or recreation facility to immediately remove such animal from the park or recreation facility upon such animal exhibiting aggressive behavior toward any person or toward any other domesticated animal. For the purposes of this subsection, aggressive behavior includes, but is not limited to growling, baring of teeth or fangs, biting or attempts to bite, or any other behavior that could reasonably be expected to scare or intimidate any person or domestic animal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-43. - Dogs in off leash areas or dog parks. 
Notwithstanding section 42-42, an owner or custodian of a dog is not required to have the dog on a leash in a park or portion of a park which has been designated as an "off-leash area" with the following restrictions: 
(1)  No owner or custodian of a dangerous, vicious or guard/protection dog, as defined in section 10-26 of the Animal Control Ordinance, shall permit the dog to be in an off-leash area at any time. 
(2)  No person shall allow an animal other than a dog to enter into or remain in an area that has been designated as an "off-leash area." 
(3)  The owner or custodian of a dog in an "off-leash area" shall ensure that such dog is under control at all times. 
(4)  An animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may order that a dog be put on a leash and/or order that a dog be removed from an off-leash area at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-44. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful to camp overnight in any park or recreation facility unless such person has first obtained a permit to camp in the park or recreation facility from the director or the director's authorized agent at sites or areas specifically designated by the county for camping within the park or recreation facility and then only in accordance with such rules, regulations and restrictions established by the director or the director's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-45. - Commercial activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or service to members of the public or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity marketed towards members of the public in a park or recreation facility unless authorized by written permit from the director or the director's authorized agent. For the purposes of this section, private lessons given in any park or recreational facility for personal profit shall be considered to be marketed towards members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-46. - Discharge of firearms in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in any park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-47. - Open fires in parks. 
No open fires except in picnic grills as provided by the county shall be permitted at any time or at any place in any park or recreation facility. Fires in picnic grills as provided by the county shall not be left unattended and shall be completely extinguished before leaving the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-48. - Golfing regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice, play or otherwise participate in the game of golf, except at a recreation facility designated by the county for such use and only in accordance with the rules, regulations and restrictions established by the director or the director's authorized agent. For the purposes of this section, the game of golf does not include disc golf. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-49. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The hours of operation for all park or recreation facilities except those outlined in subsection (b) shall be from sunrise to 11:00 p.m. Exterior athletic field and court lights shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. except to conclude scheduled recreation or sporting events in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  The director will have the authority to establish the hours and days of operation for the Cherokee County Aquatic Center, Recreation Center, Union Hill Community Center, and Waleska Splash Pad. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be posted at each park or recreation facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be within a park or recreation facility outside of the posted hours of operation unless approved by written permit or unless such person is participating in an authorized and scheduled program, class, special event or meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-50. - Littering and dumping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, dump or otherwise dispose of household garbage or any other trash, waste, refuse or debris not connected with his use and enjoyment of the parks and recreation facility. Littering, dumping and other forms of prohibited disposition are defined in the general laws of this state. 
All garbage, trash, waste and other debris generated from the use by patrons of the parks and recreation facility shall be properly disposed of in containers provided for that purpose or at other such places where disposition or disposal may lawfully be made. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park or recreation facility by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-51. - Operation of motor vehicles regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in a park or recreation facility at an excessive speed, in a reckless and unsafe manner, or in violation of posted traffic signs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon or across any part of any park or recreation facility except upon areas designated for vehicular travel. 
Subsection (b) shall not apply to county employees, volunteers and contractors whose duties require them to drive and/or park motor vehicles or equipment over such parks as authorized by the director or the director's authorized agent. This subsection shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or emergency personnel when their duties require them to drive over and/or park their vehicle within said park or recreation facility. 
(c)  See article I, section 38-5 of the Cherokee County Code of Ordinances regarding the operation of all-terrain vehicles in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-52. - Parking regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a park or recreation facility except in marked parking spaces or those areas designated by official signage as vehicle parking areas. 
Subsection (a) shall not apply to county employees, volunteers and contractors whose duties require them to drive and/or park motor vehicles or equipment over such parks as authorized by the director or the director's authorized agent. This subsection shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or emergency personnel when their duties require them to drive over and/or park their vehicle within said park or recreation facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave a motor vehicle standing or parked in a park or recreation facility during hours when the park or recreation facility is closed, except for overnight campers who are within officially designated overnight camping areas, or unless otherwise authorized by the director or the director's agent. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in violation of posted restrictions and regulations, or in such a manner as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency traffic movement, or where the parking of such vehicle creates a safety hazard, or endangers any person, property or environmental feature. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a parking space or location designated for handicapped parking unless such vehicle properly displays a handicapped parking permit. 
(e)  In addition to a citation for violation of this article, any motor vehicle found to be parked in violation of this article shall be subject to impoundment at the vehicle owner's sole expense by Cherokee County or by a private towing company to a private impound lot. The vehicle owner shall be responsible for all towing expenses and charges incurred for towing the vehicle and all accrued daily impoundment storage fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 2017-O-006, § 2, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 42-53. - Smoking, vaping, and tobacco use in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, vape, exhale, burn, or carry any turned on e-cigarette, lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other combustible substance in any manner or form within 25 feet of a playground, picnic pavilion, athletic field or court including the adjacent spectator areas, or outdoor pool or aquatic playground. Consistent with the county's No-Smoking Ordinance, smoking, vaping, and tobacco use are prohibited inside any building located within a park or recreation facility or within of 25 feet of the entrance or exit of said building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-54. - Use of detection devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any electronic device for the detection of metals, minerals, artifacts, lost articles, or for treasure hunting in any park or recreation facility without written authorization from the director or the director's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-55. - Use of engine-powered models, toys and unmanned aerial systems. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to start, fly or use any fuel-powered engine, jet-type or electric powered model aircraft, boat or rocket or like powered toy or unmanned aerial system, except at those areas designated by the county for such use and then only in accordance with such rules, regulations and restrictions established by the director or the director's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-56. - Use of skateboards, scooters, skates and bicycles. 
(a)  Use of bicycles, scooters, skateboards or skates is permitted only in areas within a park or recreation facility designated by the director or the director's authorized agent for such operation. 
(b)  No person under the age of 16 years shall operate or be a passenger on a bicycle, scooter, skateboard or skates within a park or recreation facility unless such person is wearing a helmet which meets or exceeds the impact standards for helmets under Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-57. - Severability. 
If any part of this article is for any reason held to be void or invalid, the validity of the remaining parts of this article or its application to other persons or set of circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 42-58. - Repealer. 
All previous ordinances, policies or resolutions in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-003, 6-16-15) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cherokee Clean Commission, § 2-56 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; buinesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the county; 
(2)  Protect and enhance the quality of the environment; 
(3)  Institute and maintain countywide rules and regulations controlling the spread of litter; and 
(4)  Establish rules and regulations concerning solid waste management to ensure that solid waste systems, whether privately or publicly operated, do not adversely affect the health, safety and well-being of the public and do not unduly degrade the quality of the environment. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, art. I; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 46-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to thin in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alterations of existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing buildings. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter. The use of this term is generic and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Dumpster monitor refers to the person or persons authorized by the commissioner to inspect and patrol the areas where dumpsters are located in the county and the roads or streets of the county, and who are responsible for enforcing this chapter. Dumpster monitors shall be authorized by the commissioner to issue citations to violators of this chapter. 
Garbage means any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetative material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered. 
Garbage bag means a plastic, or other similar nonporous material, bag or sack designed specifically to contain garbage or household trash in a secure, airtight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such a as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle which either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled to the extent it may not be lawfully driven on the public roads. 
Junkyard includes land on which two or more junk vehicles are parked, standing or allowed to remain. 
Landfill means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall like wise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust or other similar materials. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 4.1; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIB, 10-20-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-3. - Garbage collection/pickup vehicles. 
Applications for garbage collection/pickup vehicles shall be issued only to vehicles having compaction equipment and capacity. The provisions of this section shall not apply to those firms or vehicles presently operation garbage collection routes within the county. 
(Ord. of 7-10-78; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05) 
Secs. 46-4—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 46-31. - Enforcing officers; issuing of citations. 
(a)  Any peace officer of the state or the commissioner may name, by appropriate resolution, an employee of the county to serve as his designee and to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  The commissioner may name, by appropriate resolution, such persons as he feels necessary to be dumpster monitors. Such dumpster monitors shall be under the supervision of the designee described in subsection (a) of this section and shall patrol, inspect and monitor dumpster sites to ensure compliance with this chapter, and shall monitor all areas of the county for violations of this chapter. 
(c)  The designee of the commissioner, as the dumpster monitor, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this chapter or to the owner or any other person who may be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this chapter. Such citations shall be on a form approved by the commissioner and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 9.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIB, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 46-32. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter or any provision hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12, or as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse Cherokee County for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the (jurisdiction); and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(b)  Records of convictions for violation of this chapter shall be a matter of public record. 
(c)  No person accused of violating this chapter shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 9.1; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 46-33. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried upon citations or accusations as described in section 46-31(c) of this chapter and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney or another attorney designated by the commissioner shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the commissioner from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct or abate any violation of this chapter. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy by law. 
(d)  Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 9.2; Ord. No. 2005-O-003, 6-21-05) 
Secs. 46-34—46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIB, adopted Oct. 20, 2009, deleted Art. III in its entirety. Former Art. III, §§ 46-61—46-76, pertained to litter control and derived from Ord. No. 2006-O-001, adopted Mar. 7, 2006. Ord. No. 2009-O-006 also renumbered Art. IV, Solid Waste Management, as Art. III to read as set out herein. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-91. - Private collection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the county except from his own residence, business or individual plant without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the county, and without first having obtained a county business license. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 6.0) 
Sec. 46-92. - Private landfills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a landfill, waste disposal area or waste storage area intended to be used by the owner or used by others for the disposal or storage of waste without first having filed the proper application for a special use permit with the county zoning appeals board and complying with the zoning resolution of the county applying to private landfills under article X, section E, subsection 3(g)(8) of such zoning resolution. The owner of any landfill must also obtain a proper permit from the department of natural resources and a county business license. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the county until the applicant has shown, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners, that all federal, state and county regulations and ordinances will be complied with in the operation and management of the landfill, waste disposal area or waste storage area, and that the location of the landfill, waste disposal area or waste storage area is such that there is no detriment to the environment, including, but not limited to, noxious odors, runoff or contamination of surface water and groundwater, so that the maximum protection is afforded to the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(c)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(d)  The commissioner shall designate county employees, and his designees shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 6.1; Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 7-26-91) 
Sec. 46-93. - Public landfills. 
(a)  The county, through the commissioner, may operate and maintain public landfills located on county property and in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the county sanitary landfill. 
(c)  Such sites shall be maintained while in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting notices and through public advertisements. The commissioner may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type or types of refuse. 
(d)  Commercial collections, including yard maintenance men, may use the public designated sites. Residents of the county, other than commercial collectors, may use public sites upon payment of a fee, if any, to be set by the commissioner in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(e)  No refuse generated outside the county will be accepted at any disposal site. 
(f)  Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Saturday of each week, with the exception of holidays. During the hours designated by the commissioner or his designee, acceptable refuse generated in the county shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county. 
(g)  No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in this chapter. All materials delivered and deposited in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 6.2) 
Sec. 46-94. - Cost reimbursement fees; surcharges. 
Any and all reimbursement fees and surcharges authorized by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39 are hereby levied by the board of commissioners and authorization is hereby given to collect the same. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, 7-22-94) 
Secs. 46-95—46-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION OF REFUSE FOR DISPOSAL 

Sec. 46-121. - Domestic refuse. 
The following types of refuse shall be classed as domestic refuse and shall be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Garbage. 
(2)  Business trash. 
(3)  Refuse. 
(4)  Household trash. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 7.0) 
Sec. 46-122. - Industrial waste. 
The following types of waste shall be classified as industrial waste and shall not be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Industrial waste. 
(2)  Hazardous refuse. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 7.1) 
Sec. 46-123. - Building materials. 
Building materials, if presented to the county for disposal, may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the commissioner or his designee. 
(Ord. of 2-14-89, § 7.3) 
Sec. 46-124. - Yard trimmings disposal restrictions. 
(a)  Definition: Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, yard trimmings are defined as leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(b)  Restrictions: 
(1)  Yard trimmings may not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings are prohibited at all municipal solid waste disposal facilities located within the county having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within their jurisdiction. 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling, and yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or shipped, composed, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(4)  Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in the magistrate's court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 46-125. - Scrap tire facilities. 
All scrap tire facilities operating within unincorporated Cherokee County shall in addition to the regulations provided herein comply with and be operated in accordance with the Environmental Protection Division Rules for Solid Waste Management (ch. 391-3-4) and in the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A., §12-8-22). Whenever such laws or regulations are amended this article shall also be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-005, 6-3-03) 
Secs. 46-126—46-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IIB, adopted Oct. 20, 2009, deleted Art. V in its entirety. Former Art. V, §§ 46-151—46-153, pertained to abandoned and junked motor vehicles and derived from an ordinance adopted Feb. 14, 1989, § 8.0; and Ord. No. 95-O-9, adopted Aug. 8, 1995. Ord. No. 2009-O-006 also renumbered Art. VI, On-site Sewage Management Systems, as Art. IV to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 46-171. - Applicability. 
These rules will have application except in the following cases: 
(1)  Any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the department of natural resources or its successor; 
(2)  Any public or community sewage treatment system; or 
(3)  Other shared jurisdiction by memoranda of agreement or other agreements. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.01, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-172. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as indicated beside each listing: 
Additive means an approved commercial product added to an on-site sewage system to enhance the performance of the system. 
Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage. 
Absorption line means a pipe line of perforated pipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent. 
Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid. 
Absorption trench bottom and side soil area means the total interface of bottom and side soil area with undisturbed soils of all absorption trenches in an absorption field and occurring horizontally and downward from the point of distribution into the soil, expressed in square feet. 
Aggregate means washed gravel or washed stone meeting the Georgia Department of Transportation standards for hardness or other materials approved by the department and shall be one-half inch to two inches in diameter. 
Alternative on-site management system means any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank system or privy. 
Approved or Approval means compliance with applicable specifications or criteria developed or accepted by the department. 
Auxiliary system means a system to serve a portion of a residence, a pool house or other adjunct facility. 
Bedroom means any room that is designed primarily for sleeping purposes, as shown on the building plan. 
Black water means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system, or other disposal. 
Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
Chamber septic tank system means a septic tank and a chamber system as defined in chamber system. 
Chamber system means a system of chambers with each chamber being a molded polyolefin plastic, arch shaped, hollow structure with an exposed bottom area and solid top and louvered sidewall for infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and sidewall soil areas. Chambers may be of different sizes and configurations to obtain desired surface areas. 
Community subsurface treatment system means any system which treats primarily domestic wastewater other than those serving single family residences or non-domestic sewage systems. 
Conventional system means a system traditionally used composed of perforated pipe surrounded by gravel or stone masking for the infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and side soil areas. 
Conventional septic tank system means any septic tank, and conventional system as defined in conventional system, but does not include alternative or experimental systems. 
County board of health means the County Board of Health established by the Georgia Health Code (O.C.G.A. 31-3-1) or its representative. 
Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia or its representative. 
Distribution device means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from a septic tank, dosing tank, or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two or more absorption lines. 
Dosing tank means an approved watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution device, either by pump or by siphon. 
Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally approved for such purposes by the department, but which has not been fully proven under field use. 
Failure means a condition of an on-site sewage system that constitutes a public hazard by inadequate treatment and/or disposal of sewage. 
Filter means an approved device that removes solids or other materials from the effluent that could cause failure of an on-site sewage management system. 
Flood plain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent water courses and coastal areas subject to intermittent tidal action. 
Gray water means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks, and garbage disposals. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal. 
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks, or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single family dwelling. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manual for on-site sewage management systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this chapter and is available for inspection at the appropriate state office in Atlanta or at local health departments. Such manual for on-site sewage management systems and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "Manual" or "Manual for On-site Sewage Management Systems." 
Mechanical treatment systems means any alternative or experimental on-site sewage management system utilizing pumps, aeration units, or other mechanical devices to treat sewage. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two (2) or more mobile homes. 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Such term shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, privies, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems which are designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent that may be approved by the department. 
Percolation coefficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day. 
Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated soil at a constant rate. 
Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil as described in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association and may extend and be applied to bodies, political and corporate. 
Physical development means development which includes, but is not limited to site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction, or installation of on-site sewage management systems. 
Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable, or incinerator toilets. 
Public water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on-site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies. 
Sewage treatment system is a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. The system shall be designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewage means and includes human excreta, all waster carried wastes, and liquid household waste from residences or commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sinkhole means a depression in the land surface, generally in a limestone region, which communicates or has the potential to communicate with a subterranean passage developed by solution; typical sinkholes can be broad, closed basin-like features or steep-sided dropouts, or variants thereof. 
Site means the location where the absorption field will be installed to include replacement area. 
Soil classifier means a person who holds at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university with a major in Agronomy, Soil Science, or related field, as approved by Soil Classifiers Certification Board. Must have completed a minimum of 15 semester hours or 25 quarter hours in approved soil science courses including a course in pedology and have four years or more of full time experience as a soil classifier/soil scientist actively mapping, identifying and classifying soil features, and interpreting the influence of soil features on soil uses. Certification shall be in accordance with guidelines published in the manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided; however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels, all of which is three acres or more in size with minimum width of 150 feet for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved on-site sewage management systems. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.02, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1. 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-173. - Residences, buildings or facilities. 
(a)  Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within 200 feet of the property line, or available in a public rights-of-way abutting the property. Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an existing public or community sewer is to be extended to serve a lot, or an approved on-site sewage management system is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will insure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. If an existing on-site sewage system fails, immediate connection shall be made to a public or community sewerage system if such a system is available. 
(b)  Any facility that produces a waste stream with BOD 5 and TSS (total suspended solids) higher than 200 mg/L shall be required to pretreat the waste to reduce the BOD 5 and TSS to 200 mg/L or below before disposal through a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
(c)  When deemed appropriate, the board may require that the on-site sewage system be installed prior to the construction of the building. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.03, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-174. - Minimum lot sizes or land area required. 
(a)  Lot size. 
(1)  To provide for orderly and safe development utilizing on-site sewage management systems, minimum lot sizes have been established. These lot sizes permit flexibility to suit soil conditions, topography and ground or surface water limitations. The following table shows the minimum lot sizes based on soil groups and slopes for individual wells and on-site sewage management systems. Larger lot sizes may be required to meet the requirements of these rules in some circumstances. 

 
*Refer to Table CT-2 Georgia Department Human Resources Manual for On-site Sewage Management Systems. 
(2)  Where on-site sewage management systems and community or public water is used, minimum lot sizes may be reduced by up to 50 percent. 
(3)  The lot sizes in (a)(1) are for single family residences. The square footage for multifamily residences shall be increased by 50 percent per unit. 
(4)  Mobile home lots located in subdivisions and mobile home parks shall meet the above size requirements. 
(5)  The above minimum lot sizes are for one, two, or three bedroom residences with basic appurtenances, i.e., driveways, minimum number of trees, water line. The county board of health may require larger lots when swimming pools, tennis courts, detached or offset garages or trees may interfere with the installation of the sewage system. The lot size shall be increased by 2,500 square feet, of usable soils area per bedroom over three bedrooms. 
(6)  Minimum lot width shall conform to the county zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Mobile home park lot sizes. Wherever possible, mobile home parks should be served by a central or community sewage system. If the mobile home park is to be served by a public or community water system and each lot or space is to be served by an individual on-site sewage management system, the lot or space shall be sized utilizing the table (a)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-22, § 290-5-26.04, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-175. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Construction permit required. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install an on-site sewage management system or component thereof without having first applied for and obtained from the county health department a construction permit for the installation. 
(1)  Application for such construction permits shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county board of health. The county board of health shall approve or disapprove such application within 20 days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include: 
1.  Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner; 
2.  Location of property; 
3.  Plans and specifications including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system including surface and subsurface drainage and piping; 
4.  Nature of the facility to be served; 
5.  Location of all water supplies, geothermal systems, or other utilities and trash pits on or off the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system; 
6.  Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data; 
7.  Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluations of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence of rock and other impervious strata; 
8.  Signature of the owner or agent applying for a permit; and 
9.  Any additional information deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the site, such as, but not limited to, a plot plan (to scale) showing the house, well, driveway, proposed location of the septic tank system, underground utilities, drainage areas, gullies, streams, lakes, ponds, etc. Also wells within 100 feet of the property lines shall be shown. Topo lines of two feet, intervals may be required to help determine slope. 
(2)  The county board of health may waive submission of part of the information required for the application, however, provided the board deems that such information is available from previously submitted subdivision or mobile home park data, or from other sources, and is sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for the installation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(3)  Before a site evaluation of a lot is performed by the county board of health, the property owner or his agent may be required to clear lot lines and building site, post an identification marker in the front center of the lot, and may be required to place stakes at the corners of the proposed building, at the proposed stub out, and at the proposed or existing well location. Pins or other identifiers denoting the lot corners shall be located. A survey of the property may also be required. 
(4)  Repairs, replacement, or additions to existing systems must be permitted and inspected. The installer or the home owner shall be responsible for applying for a permit and paying fees. 
(5)  Any person preparing to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for the installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit plans showing the type and extent of modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval of the plans by the county board of health. Such approval shall be in accordance with the provisions of the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)  Requirements for on-site sewage management system construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits shall be issued only after a site inspection by the county board of health shows favorable findings relative to absorption rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock, and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. No construction permit for an on-site sewage management system shall be issued prior to the approval of the public water supply system, where a public water supply system is to be utilized. Lot suitability and approval is to be determined by the criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Lots shall be sized according to the regulations of the county board of health. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-1, 31-5-2, 31-5-3, 31-5-4, 31-5-5 and 31-5-6. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issue. 
(c)  Design limits for conventional or chamber septic tank systems. To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional or chamber septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed, or used, having a septic tank design capacity of less than 1000 gallons or greater than 10,000 gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed 3,000 linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed 9,000 square feet. 
(d)  Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data. Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, absorption test data, submitted to the county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install an on-site sewage management system, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state. The county board of health may accept plans, specifications, soil data, and absorption test data for facilities with sewage flow of 2,000 gallons or less per day, when prepared in accordance with these rules, from any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county board of health that they have sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design. 
(1)  Mechanized treatment systems with subsurface disposal. A registered, professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state shall design and certify installation of these systems. Information on the type of system shall be attached to the property deed and properly recorded. 
(e)  Soil data acceptability for individual lots. Effective 24 months after the adoption of these rules, soil evaluations shall be conducted by individuals meeting the requirements established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(f)  Construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits shall be issued only after a site inspection by a representative of county board of health shows favorable findings relative to absorption rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock, and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. No construction permit for an on-site sewage management system shall be issued prior to the approval of the public water supply system, where a public water supply system is to be utilized. Lot suitability and approval is to be determined by the criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-1, 31-5-2, 31-5-3, 31-5-4, 31-5-5 and 31-5-6. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issue. 
(1)  Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site sewage management system, and subsequent approval of the same by representatives of the county board of health shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representatives do not, by any action taken in affecting compliance with these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system. 
(2)  On tracts or parcels of land of three acres or more, where the absorption rate exceeds 90 minutes per inch, the conventional or chamber septic tank system may be based on the percolation rate not to exceed 120 minutes per inch. All other conditions must comply with the requirements of the regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-22, § 290-5-26.05, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-176. - Inspection. 
No person may cover or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under section 46-175(3) and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. 
(1)  A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate. 
(2)  Grading, filling, digging trash pits or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the county board of health which may adversely affect the on-site sewage management system shall render the approval void. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.06, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-177. - Approved locations (Subdivisions and mobile home parks). 
(a)  Predevelopment review. It is recommended that developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to developmental improvements. Rejection or tentative approval may be obtained by submitting a boundary plat including: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  A topographic map; 
(3)  A preliminary soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)  Proposals and Plans Required. The following information is required for subdivision and mobile home park proposals: 
(1)  A boundary plat drawn to a reasonable scale which includes: 
a.  A vicinity map; 
b.  Proposed lots and streets including lot identification, dimensions, building lines and square footage of lots; 
c.  A topographic map depicted in two foot intervals, provided. However, that lesser contour intervals may be approved by the county board of health if the slope is sufficiently steep; 
d.  A soil map and soil description based on a high intensity study conducted in compliance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems; 
e.  The location of all present and proposed wells, water systems, water courses, flood plains, sewage systems, structures, right-of-ways, utilities, storm water drainage systems and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property; and 
f.  The name, registration number and seal of the preparing professional surveyor or engineer. 
(2)  A completed subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department or county board of health. 
(3)  A copy of the following documents issued by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources: 
a.  The land disturbance activity permit; 
b.  The letters of approval to begin construction of a public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply is to be utilized; and 
c.  The approved storm water pollution plan, where applicable. 
(c)  Approval required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision or mobile home park until written approval of plans for the water supply and sewage disposal has been obtained from the county board of health. This approval constitutes general acceptance of all lots not excluded for development utilizing on-site sewage management systems. (Excluded lots may receive further consideration based on additional information.) 
(d)  Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems for subdivision and mobile home parks. Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks utilizing on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted: 
(1)  When a public or community sewage system is available within 500 feet off the subdivision or mobile home park; 
(2)  When soils maps, descriptions, and reports compiled by a registered soil classifier indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development of on-site sewage management systems. 
(3)  Prior to receipt of a letter(s) from the environmental protection division approving the plans to construct the public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized. 
(e)  Subdivision and mobile home park percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorptive capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Preparatory to construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 290-5-26.14 of the rules for on-site sewage management systems. 
(f)  Subdivision and mobile home park test bores. Where required for planning purposes, test bores to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations, in numbers and at depths to be determined by the department or county board of health. 
(g)  Subdivision site walk-over. Prior to the walk-over of the proposed subdivision land, the proposed corner property lines of each lot shall be staked and the lot number affixed to each stake. The sidelines of each lot line shall be flagged and the board of health may also require clearing of the lot lines. 
(h)  Construction permits. Construction permits for on-site sewage management systems shall be issued in accordance with section 290-5-26.05(1)(a) of the rules for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.07, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7, 31-3-5. 
Sec. 46-178. - Sewers. 
(a)  Size of sewers. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management systems shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions. 
(b)  Sewers. All solid pipe and fittings used in an on-site sewage management system, beginning at the house, shall be NSF International schedule 40 PVC or equivalent and shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing. 
(c)  Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tiles used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation, and shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade that will insure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the county board of health may verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.08, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-179. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall provide a minimum of 24 hours of retention and shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the department as published in the current manual for on-site sewage management systems. After the effective date of these regulations, any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management systems, shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and other information as may be required by the department. Manufacturers and suppliers may be subject to periodic inspection, and approval by the county board of health or the department. Six months after the date of the adoption of these regulations, both the inlet and outlet tees shall be NSF International schedule 40 PVC or equivalent. In addition, an approved filter shall be installed on the outlet end of the septic tank in compliance with the manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)  Location. No septic tank shall be installed less than 50 feet from existing or proposed wells/springs, sink holes, or suction water lines, and tanks shall be located downgrade from wells or springs if physically possible; less than 25 feet from lakes, ponds, streams, water courses, other impoundments; less than ten feet from pressure water supply lines, or less than ten feet from a property line. No septic tank shall be installed less than 15 feet from a drainage ditch or embankment. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. Normally, the distance a septic tank should be located from a building foundation is at least ten feet, but lesser distances may be allowed by the county board of health. The county board of health, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances than cited herein due to unusual conditions of topography, or other site configuration; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. 
(c)  Capacity. Twelve months after the date of the adoption of the regulations for on-site sewage management systems, the liquid capacity of septic tanks for single family dwellings shall be 1000 gallons for one, two, three or four bedrooms, and 250 additional gallons for each bedroom more than four. Septic tank capacity shall be increased by 50 percent where garbage grinders are to be used. Auxiliary systems serving single family residences or other facilities shall be based on the maximum daily flow. 
(d)  Compartmented tanks. Twelve months after the adoption of these regulations for on-site sewage management systems, two compartment tanks shall be required. The first compartment shall be at least two-thirds the liquid capacity of the tank. 
(e)  Tanks in series. The county board of health may approve the installation of two septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least 1000 gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank. 
(f)  Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks will be constructed or installed level, on a foundation that will prevent settling; backfill shall be placed so that a stable fill results and undue strain on the tank is avoided. Earth backfill shall be free of voids, large stones, stumps, broken masonry, or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six inches over the tank is recommended. With proper documentation the county board of health may approve less cover. All openings and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of surface water. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.09, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-180. - Distribution devices and dosing tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction of distribution devices. Distribution devices shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)  Minimum design and construction of dosing tanks. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.10, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-181. - Absorption fields. 
(a)  Absorption area. The absorption area shall be based upon the anticipated volume of treated sewage and upon the characteristics of the soil in which absorption fields are to be located as specified in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. All lots must include an approved replacement area equal in size to an conventional, chamber, or alternative system, whichever is larger. Soil characteristics and other related data, including percolation tests, may be required by the county board of health. Absorption areas shall be classified as follows: Aggregate, non-aggregate and other. 
(b)  Prior approved systems. Any prior approved system as defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated 31-2-7 (a) (4) is approved for installation according to manufacturers' recommendation. 
(c)  Location. No absorption field will be constructed less than 100 feet from existing or proposed wells, springs or sinkholes; less than ten feet from water supply lines and buildings, other structures, and property lines; less than 15 feet from an embankment or trash pits, nor less than 50 feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream, or other body of water, including wetlands. If the water supply line crosses or comes within ten feet of the absorption field the water supply line shall be installed at least 12 inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line and shall be encased in a single length of larger diameter water pipe. No absorption field shall be installed in areas where groundwater, soil characteristics or adverse geological formation may interfere with the absorption or effective treatment of sewage effluent. The board of health may require that the area in which the on-site sewage management system is located be protected from surface water and roof or downspout drainage. No part of the absorption field other than sealed pipe with watertight joints shall be covered by buildings, pavements, driveways, or used for parking automotive vehicles or for vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Minimum design and construction for absorption fields. Absorption lines and absorption trenches shall be designed and installation in accordance with the minimum design and installation criteria established in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.11, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-182. - Privies. 
Minimum design and construction. Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.12, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-183. - Alternative-on-site sewage management systems. 
(a)  Alternative on-site sewage management system. Any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank or privy. 
(b)  Design and construction. Alternative on-site sewage management systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. The department shall maintain a list of approved alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.13, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-184. - Experimental on-site sewage management systems. 
Experimental on-site sewage management systems means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally accepted for such purposes by the department's technical review committee. Any limitations to the use of experimental systems shall be decided by the department's technical review committee. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.14, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-185. - Septage removal and disposal. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies, or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from the department or county board of health a septate removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal permits shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the county board of health at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal and such other documentation as may be required by the county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. 
(1)  The permit shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations or the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(b)  Pumping and disposal methods. Approved methods of pumping and disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: discharge to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in a wastewater treatment plant, treatment at separate septage handling facilities, or direct land application. Pumping and disposal shall be in accordance with the requirements of the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(1)  Pumping of tank must be done in such a manner so as to insure removal of collected solids: 
a.  Remove lid or manhole covers; 
b.  Agitate to facilitate removal of solids; and 
c.  Pump all liquids and solids from tank. 
(c)  Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(d)  Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained so as to prevent leakage. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.15, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-186. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Grease traps required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on-site sewage management systems where it is determined by the county board of health that the amount of grease introduced into the system is in excess of 50 milligrams per liter. 
(b)  Grease trap design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the county board of health for approval. The county board of health shall review the grease trap design in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in a septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease, and easy access for cleaning is provided. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.16, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-187. - Sewage flow. 
Sizing. Sizing of on-site sewage management systems shall be determined from the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. The daily sewage flow may be determined by the department after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak flow and not on long term averages. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.17, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: O.C.G.A. Sections 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-188. - Subdivision, mobile home park water supply. 
(a)  Public water supply. Connection to a public water supply system shall be required if available within 1,0000 feet of the proposed subdivision or mobile home park. 
(1)  Where a public water supply system will not be utilized, lots shall be sized to accommodate individual wells. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.18, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-189. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge. No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater, or other body of water. 
(b)  Maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for properly operating and maintaining the on-site sewage management system to increase the life expectancy and prevent failure. Maintenance of the system shall be in accordance with standards developed by the county board of health. 
(1)  Mechanical treatment systems with subsurface disposal. Prior to placing the system into operation, the owner shall obtain a permit to operate such system from a representative of the county board of health. The operating permit must be renewed annually. To qualify for the operating permit, the owner must submit a copy of a signed maintenance contract with the manufacturer or licensed distributor or a company or individual acceptable to the county board of health. Conventional or chamber systems utilizing pumps are excluded from this requirement. 
(c)  Multiple ownership. Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to insure proper operation and maintenance of the system signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of an on-site sewage management system. 
(d)  Additives. Sewage system additives which are used to enhance the operation of an on-site sewage management system must be approved by the department. No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of the system. 
(e)  Existing system evaluations. If a performance evaluation of an existing system is conducted, the evaluation shall be performed in accordance with the procedure established in the department's current. Manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(f)  Variances. The county board of health may grant variances in the cases of hardship where existing systems are malfunctioning. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.19, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7, 31-3-5. 
Sec. 46-190. - Technical review committee. 
(a)  Technical review committee. The department shall appoint and maintain a technical review committee consisting of a maximum of fifteen individuals with the technical and scientific knowledge relating to on-site sewage management systems. The duties of the committee will be to approve new systems, periodically review systems performance, assist the department with the development of standards and guidelines for new technology, assist with the adoption of periodic updating of the manual for on-site sewage management systems, revisions to standards and be the ultimate authority in contested interpretational issues. The committee shall also maintain a list of approved systems. 
(b)  Membership. The committee shall include at least one individual from the following disciplines: 
(1)  An environmental health section staff person who shall serve as the secretary; 
(2)  Local county environmentalist; 
(3)  Health district environmentalist; 
(4)  Engineering; 
(5)  Manufacturing; 
(6)  Home builders association; 
(7)  Soil classifier; 
(8)  University/academia; 
(9)  District health director, and 
(10)  Environmental protection division. 
(c)  Meetings. The committee shall meet as deemed appropriate by the department. 
(d)  Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the technical review of new products and technology. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.20, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1,31-2-1,31-2-2, 31-2-4,31-2-7,31-3-4. 
Sec. 46-191. - Certification and decertification of septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel. 
(a)  Certification required. Twenty-four months after the adoption of these regulations, individuals performing services related to, site approval, the design, location, installation, inspection and maintenance of on-site sewage management systems, must be certified by the department. 
(1)  Guidelines defining certification qualifications for septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel shall be established by the department and shall be published in the manual for on-site sewage management systems. The guidelines shall be based on education, experience, testing and performance. 
(2)  The department shall write a protocol for decertification of persons certified under the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Certification shall be required every two years and shall be based upon continuing education. 
(b)  Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the certification and recertification of the persons listed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.21, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1,31-2-1,31-2-2,31-2-4,31-2-7,31-3-4. 
Sec. 46-192. - Appeals. 
Any person may appeal the denial of a permit to construct an on-site sewage management system to the appeals board utilizing forms provided by the county board of health. Where the public health is not endangered, the appeals board may waive or grant a variance of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.22, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1,31-2-1,31-2-2,31-2-4,31-2-7,31-3-5. 
Sec. 46-193. - Errors and omissions insurance. 
[Any] soil classifier practicing in this county shall be required to carry errors and omission insurance. Documentation confirming coverage shall be provided to the health department upon request. This requirement shall become effective thirty days after the adoption of these rules. The amount of coverage shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-27-.23, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-3-5. 
Sec. 46-194. - Enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. Chapter 31-5. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-110, § 290-5-26.24, 10-13-98) 
Legal Authority: 12-8-1, 31-2-1, 31-2-2, 31-2-4, 31-2-7. 
Sec. 46-195. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this rule shall be guilty as provided by state law. Each and every violation of the provisions of this rule shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-22, § 290-5-26.25, 10-13-98) 
Chapter 50 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1, et seq.; obstructing, encroaching on, or injuring public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Motorized carts on public sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  Motorized means any vehicle gasoline powered. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle, motorized equipment, motorized scooters, motorized skateboards, motorized cycles or any other similar vehicle on any public sidewalk within unincorporated Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2001-012, §§ 1, 2, 8-14-01) 
Secs. 50-2—50-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDRESS NUMBERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number `911' Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 50-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If the owner of property does not place the number as required by this article or remove any other number within 60 days after service of notice and an order to do so by the chief of emergency 911 service or his appointed representative, the owner shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.00 after initially receiving a warning. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 5, 6-28-91) 
Sec. 50-37. - Enforcement of article. 
The board of commissioners hereby directs the chief of emergency 911 service as follows: 
(1)  To serve a notice and order on the owners of premises on all streets numbered or renumbered pursuant to this article and upon all buildings found inaccurately numbered or renumbered or found with numbers insufficiently legible or otherwise in violation of this article. Such notice and order shall require the placing of assigned numbers or removal of numbers in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To inspect buildings following the service of such notice and order. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 4, 6-28-91) 
Sec. 50-38. - Numbering system; assignment of numbers. 
The board of commissioners hereby directs the numbering or renumbering of all roads and streets and accordingly directs the chief of emergency 911 service as follows: 
(1)  To number or renumber the streets from time to time as he may deem necessary. One number may be assigned to every 15 feet of length on each side of the street. Where feasible, the odd number shall be placed on the west side of a street running north and south and on the south side of a street running east and west. 
(2)  To assign numbers to buildings, existing or planned, in accordance with such street numbering. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 6-28-91) 
Sec. 50-39. - Display of numbers. 
(a)  Required. Principal buildings used or to be used for residential, mixed occupancy, commercial, industrial or storage purposes shall bear or display at least one set of assigned street or road numbers. 
(b)  Design and location. Such number shall be Arabic in design, with a minimum height of two inches, and shall be mounted in a secure fashion to the building's front wall, or to a porch or other fixed appurtenance in front of the building in the vicinity of the main entryway or main path of travel leading to the main entrance from a public street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved manner upon the face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard of the premises. 
(c)  Height; visibility. All street or road numbers shall be mounted at a height between four feet and ten feet above the adjacent grade, street or exterior porch landing directly beneath, but not higher than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of the whole, so that the numbers may be read with ease during daylight hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision as he views the numbers from the centerline of the facing street or road at an elevation of five feet above the finished surface thereof. Trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall not block the street numbers. 
(d)  Properties with frontage of 200 feet or more. Properties containing more than a 200-foot frontage on any one street or road shall be required to pass the visibility tests at each available point of pedestrian or vehicular entry or exit from the property. 
(e)  Exemption for buildings fronting on expressways. Building elevations that face expressways are exempt from the provisions of this section where they have not been normally assigned house numbers. 
(f)  Violations. The absence of house numbers, the insecure fastening or absence of all or any part of a number, the use of any number out of logical sequence for the street or road which it faces, or the failure of a number to meet the elevation requirements or the visibility requirements shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, §§ 2, 3, 6-28-91) 
Secs. 50-40—50-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES 

Sec. 50-66. - Approval of board of commissioners required; adoption of resolution. 
Each street name or road name within the unincorporated area of the county shall be designated by the board of commissioners by a majority vote at a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. Each street or road naming shall be preceded by the adoption of a resolution of the board of commissioners designating such name. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 50-67. - Duplicate names prohibited. 
No street or road name shall be duplicated within the county by name or phonetic similarity. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 2, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 50-68. - Streets in new subdivisions. 
New subdivision streets may be named by the developer or his agent so long as the name does not in any way conflict with section 50-67 dealing with duplication and phonetic similarity and the name is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 3, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 50-69. - Unnamed streets and private drives. 
Names for unnamed streets and private drives may be designated by a majority of residents and property owners along the street or private drive upon presentation of the name to and approval of the name by the board of commissioners. In the absence of such a designation by the property owners or majority of residents, the board of commissioners shall direct that the director of communications and planning director shall jointly name such streets or private drives. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 4, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 50-70. - Petition to rename street. 
Any person wishing to rename a street to a name that is not a duplicate of or phonetically similar to another name may do so by submitting a petition signed by at least two-thirds of the property owners owning property along such roadway to the board of commissioners for approval. Approval shall be granted or withheld as outlined in this article. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 5, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 50-71. - Notification of utility companies and public agencies. 
Any resolution adopting a street or road name within the county by the board of commissioners shall be submitted to the United States Postal Service, utility companies and all public safety departments for designation upon the appropriate lists and maps. 
(Res. No. 92-2, § 6, 1-14-92) 
Secs. 50-72—50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROAD ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 50-91. - Adoption. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that those persons representing at least 100 percent of the property owners upon any existing county road, who seek to have the road added to the county road map and voluntarily wish that an assessment program be made whereby assessments are made upon their property for the repayment of county funds extended for the upgrade of the road to at least a type 3 road be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § 1, 12-30-94) 
Sec. 50-92. - Petition. 
Upon the presentation of a petition containing at least 100 percent of the property owners along the road and after evaluation and cost estimates prepared by the county, the assessment program shall be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § 2, 12-30-94) 
Sec. 50-93. - Assessment program. 
The procedure as promulgated in O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq., shall be utilized by the county for the imposition of voluntary assessment program for road improvements. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § 3, 12-30-94) 
Secs. 50-94—50-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ROAD DRAINAGE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 30. 

Sec. 50-106. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Road Drainage Code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 1, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-107. - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate activities affecting the drainage system of public ways within the unincorporated area of the county in order to maintain the integrity of the public ways and protect property owners abutting such. Those portions of this article requiring a permit shall not apply to roadways under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation where permits are issued by that agency. Those portions of this article prohibiting activities which compromise the integrity of the public road system and its drainage structures shall apply to all public ways within the unincorporated area of the county irrespective of the government agency exercising jurisdiction over such roads. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 2, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-108. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this article, words shall be defined as defined in the "Comprehensive Zoning and Land Use Resolution of Cherokee County, Georgia," as such now exists or as such may hereafter be amended. For purposes of this article, the term "public way" shall include any road, street, highway, or other public way maintained by the county including all adjacent areas necessary for maintenance thereof including ditches, cuts, and fills. The term "public way" shall also include any facilities appurtenant to such public way, but not limited to, culverts, drainage easements, retention structures, etc. The term "public way" shall also include any public way as herein defined maintained by any government agency other than the county in those instances where such government agent does not have rules and regulations in conflict with this article. For purposes of this article, the words "commercial or business enterprise" shall be construed to include any structure or building other than a dwelling unit whether or not it is actually occupied. The words "commercial or business enterprise" shall also be construed to include any real property upon which vehicles are parked or chattels stored in connection with a for-profit venture whether or not the commercial or business enterprise is actually located on the particular parcel. For purposes of this article, the words "commercial or business enterprise" shall also be construed to include any building designed to accommodate more than two dwelling units notwithstanding the form of ownership utilized. In the case of condominiums, time-sharing plans, and other arrangements of multiple ownership, all persons owing any interest shall be equally responsible under this article together with the person exercising maintenance duties on the premises, if any. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 3, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-109. - Residential drainage structures, permits. 
No person shall install a permanent (more than six months) culvert or other drainage structure on any public way for the purpose of allowing vehicular ingress and egress to a dwelling unit unless and until written notice has been provided to the employees of the public works department, building official, the administrator, or such other person or persons as the board may from time to time designate for that purpose; provided, however, a separate notification shall not be required if the installation is pursuant to a building permit setting forth the size and type of the drainage structure in addition to the usual building information. The notification shall set forth the size and type of the culvert or other drainage structure and approve the installation thereof. No fee shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 4, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-110. - Commercial driveways and drainage structures permits. 
No person shall install a permanent (more than six months) culvert or other drainage structure on any public way for the purpose of allowing vehicular ingress and egress to a business or commercial enterprise, nor shall any person install a drive or way for such purpose on any public way, without first having provided written notice in the manner set forth in section 50-109 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 5, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-111. - Material to be kept out of drainage system. 
(a)  No person shall deposit any trash, garbage, debris, brush, soil or other foreign matter onto any public way. No person shall cause water to be discharged onto any public way from the premises of a commercial or business enterprise, or from the premises of a dwelling unit, or from a vacant lot, which water discharge contains sediment, trash, or other debris in an amount sufficient to, cause deposit of such material within the public way. 
(c)  No owner of any interest in real property, possessory or otherwise, shall allow to be discharged from such premises onto any public way water containing sediment, trash, or other debris in an amount sufficient to cause deposit of such material within the public way. 
(d)  No person shall alter any public way drainage system in any manner causing water to be discharged across the traveled surface of the public way. All driveway installations, residential, commercial, or otherwise, shall insure that runoff enters the roadway drainage system on the side of the public way abutting the installation. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 6, 3-22-96) 
Sec. 50-112. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense. The planning director, public works director, building official, the county attorney, other appropriate official or employee, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by any violation, in addition to the criminal penalties set forth herein, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct, or abate the violation or threatened violation. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, ch. 7, 3-22-96) 
Secs. 50-113—50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CURFEWS 

Sec. 50-121. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-17, § 1, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 50-122. - Definitions. 
Curfew. A curfew is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, exempt individuals include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to county ordinance no. 99-0-20 ("Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and Repair Services During a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-17, § 2, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 50-123. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated areas of the county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-17, § 3, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 50-124. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-17, § 4, 7-13-99) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Business and occupational license taxes and fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Decals required on manufactured housing. 
All manufactured housing as defined by the development regulations of Cherokee County are required to display in a prominent place a valid and current county ad valorem tax decal issued by the tax commissioner of Cherokee County on the structure of the manufactured home as required by Georgia Law. The failure to display said decal as so required is a violation of this county ordinance and such a violation shall be heard in the magistrate's court of Cherokee County and violators shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 2-28-92) 
Secs. 54-2—54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 54-36. - Levy; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county, at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. For purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.184, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 54-37. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $200.00. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.185, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 54-38. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, each depository financial institution subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the business license department on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioners of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The county business license department shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.186, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 54-39. - Due date for payment. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 54-38, unless such time is extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.187, 2-28-92) 
Sec. 54-40. - Forwarding of copy of article to financial institutions. 
The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution in the county, and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Res. No. 92-17, § 1.188, 2-28-92) 
Secs. 54-41—54-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 7, 2016, repealed former art. III, §§ 54-66—54-78, and enacted a new art. III, §§ 54-66—54-80. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 92-17, adopted February 28, 1992. 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
County means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means the primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room or rooms occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin, campground, or any other place containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, detention building or other building in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means a calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant means any person (or persons utilizing as a single unit) who, for consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, agreement or otherwise 
Operator means any person operating a hotel or entitled to be paid the rent received for occupancy of a guest room within such hotel in the special district, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee, online travel companies, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel or entitled to be paid the rent received for occupancy of a guest room within such hotel, including private owners who rent or lease private residences for more than two days in any one year. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for at least 90 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural as well as the singular number, excepting, however, the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which county is without power to impose the tax provided for in this article. 
Rent means the retail rate of consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
Special district means the geographical boundaries of the county and all of the territory within the county, except territory located within the boundaries of any municipality which imposes an excise tax on charges to the public for rooms, lodging, and accommodations within such municipal boundaries. 
Supervisor means the supervisor of the business license office, or the supervisor of any office of the county which may in the future be designated as the administrative entity to collect the tax. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-67. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), the purpose of this article is to enact an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupational taxes to, the county for operating a hotel within the special district. The provisions of this article are intended to be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., and shall be administered in conformity with such Code sections. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-68. - Authorization; tax rate; proceeds of tax. 
(a)  This article is enacted by virtue of the powers set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), as amended, and a local Act passed by the General Assembly in accordance with such statute. 
(b)  There is hereby set and levied on the occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within the special District a tax in the amount of six percent of the gross rent for such occupancy. 
(c)  The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), the resolution adopted by the governing authority of the county, and the local Act enacted by the General Assembly, which require as follows: 
(1)  The amount of taxes collected on the first three percent of the excise tax shall be expended as determined by future action of the board of commissioners, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5)(B) and § 48-13-51(a)(3); 
(2)  The amount of taxes collected on that portion of such excise tax above three percent but not above five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by contract with one or more private nonprofit organizations, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5)(B) and § 48-13-51(a)(3); 
(3)  An amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows by contract with the Cherokee County Chamber of Commerce, a private nonprofit organization under the laws of the state; and 
(4)  The remaining amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for tourism product development, including, but not limited to, capital costs and operation expenses for the Cherokee County Conference Center. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58(b), all civil penalties and interest added to any tax imposed under this article and collected by the county shall be included as revenue derived from such tax for purposes of the expenditure requirements provided herein. 
(d)  The county shall obtain and adopt budget plans each year in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(e)(1) and require audit verifications as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(f). 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-69. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  Authority of business license department. The business license department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional rules and regulations. The business license department shall have the power and the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or other applicable law, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of taxes under this article. 
(c)  Authority to examine relevant records. In administration of the tax, the business license department may examine, or authorize the examination of, folios, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator subject to this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports. In administration of the tax, the business license department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the business license department when required by the department and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the business license department may require. 
(e)  Authority to credit/refund. In administration of the tax, the business license department may allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-70. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, every person occupying a guest room in a hotel in the special district is liable for the tax imposed by this article. The occupant's liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been paid to the county, except that a receipt is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers, provided such receipt is from an operator authorized by the supervisor of the business license department to maintain a hotel in the special district. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-71. - Tax exemptions. 
In accordance with and in addition to the exemptions provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h), no tax shall be levied pursuant to this article under the following situations: 
(1)  For the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(2)  Where any room, lodgings or accommodations are furnished for a period of one or more days to the State of Georgia or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(3)  For rentals after the first 30 days of consecutive occupancy. 
(4)  Where the persons staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(5)  For rentals to any corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for more than one of such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(6)  Where the operator is a charitable trust, or a functionally related business of a charitable trust, except as otherwise allowed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-72. - Facilities operated by the department of natural resources. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54, as may be amended, any state park operated under the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, or a state authority that is administratively attached to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, which state park or authority regularly furnishes for value lodge rooms as well as meals and conference or meeting facilities or has a minimum of 20 cabins and which rooms, facilities, or cabins are located in the special district shall agree to collect and remit to the county amounts which are equal to, or partially equal to, the amounts which would be collected and remitted to the county under the tax levied by the county under this article if such rooms, facilities, or cabins were privately operated. The sums so collected and remitted shall only be expended for development, promotion, and advertising of such rooms, facilities, or cabins from which the money was collected and remitted or for similar purposes of promoting, advertising, stimulating, and developing conventions and tourism in the special district so long as said promotion or advertising prominently features the state park or state authority rooms, facilities, or cabins. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-73. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator providing lodging accommodations within the special district to collect the tax on occupants as imposed herein. 
(1)  Registration of operator. Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the special district shall immediately register said business with the county's business license department, as the duly authorized representative of the county, on a form provided by the department for such purpose. Such registration shall: 
a.  Set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business, the mailing address of the business, the principal contact person at said business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax as the business license department may require. 
b.  Be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an executive officer or someone specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration (if a corporation) or a member or partner (if an association, limited liability company, or partnership). 
A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. However, a realtor offering cabins for rent shall be deemed to be one place of business and shall not require a separate registration for each cabin rented. An operator offering more than one cabin or unit for rent under the same federal and state tax identification number shall be required to file the same number of returns as required by the state for the filing of state sales tax returns. 
(2)  Occupancy tax/operating certificate. Within ten days of the proper and complete registration of an operator, as hereinabove provided, the supervisor of the business license department shall issue to such registrant a certificate of authority to collect the tax from occupants, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed at each location so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and shall be returned to the business license department upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(3)  Collection by operator. Every operator maintaining a place of business in the special district and renting guest rooms in the special district shall collect the tax imposed by this article at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand shall give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the rent. The board of commissioners shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(4)  Unlawful advertising regarding tax. It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax imposed by this article or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guest room, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(5)  Tax remittance; due date and required report. 
a.  Due date for payment. 
1.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(B)(ii), the tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable from the occupant to the operator at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this special district, and the tax shall be a debt of the occupant to the operator until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law by the operator in the same manner as authorized for recovery of other debts. 
2.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2(a), each operator shall remit taxes due to the business license department monthly, on or before the 20th day of every calendar month next succeeding each respective month (or fiscal period) for which the return is being filed. Such payment shall be accompanied by a return (in such form as the business license department may prescribe) for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rents exempt from tax, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the business license department or governing authority of Cherokee County. 
b.  Estimated tax payment. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2(b), if the estimated tax liability of an operator for any return period exceeds $2,500.00, the operator shall file a return and remit to the business license department not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the return period on or before the 20th day of the period. The amount of the payment of the estimated tax liability shall be credited against the amount to be due on the return required under subsection 5.a. above. This subsection shall not apply to any operator unless during the previous fiscal year the operator's monthly payments exceeded $2,500.00 per month for three consecutive months or more. 
c.  Delinquent payment. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.6, the tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
d.  State sales tax return. At the time any such report is due, the operator shall file a copy of the corresponding state sales tax return for the sole purpose of verifying the sums reported and due. 
e.  No rentals in reporting period. In the event there are no rentals in a reporting period, operators are required to file a return to the county stating they had zero rentals for the period. 
f.  Extension of time for filing return or paying tax. 
1.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.3, the supervisor of the business license department may, for good cause, extend the time for making any returns or paying any tax required under this article for a period not to exceed 30 days. To be valid, such extension must be granted upon written application, and an extension shall only be valid for a period, as appropriate, of not more than 12 consecutive months (or four consecutive calendar quarters). No further extension of time may be granted. 
2.  Upon the grant of any extension authorized herein, the operator shall remit to the business license department, on or before the date the tax would otherwise become due without the grant of the extension, an amount which equals not less than 100 percent of the operator's payment for the corresponding period of the preceding tax year. 
3.  No interest or penalty shall be charged by reason of the granting of an extension during the first ten days of each extension period. Thereafter, except as otherwise expressly provided by law, interest shall accrue and be collected upon the unpaid balance of the operator's liability at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid, or as otherwise specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. For the purposes of this paragraph, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-74. - Collection allowance. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52, operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-75. - Deficiency or overpayment; late payment; failure to pay or file return. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the business license department has a reasonable basis to believe that information on the return or the amount of tax paid is incorrect, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Determination of tax when no return made. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.3(b), if any operator fails to file a return and pay the tax as required by this ordinance, the business license department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of gross rent which is subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the business license department. Upon the basis of this estimate, the business license department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the county, adding to the sum, per month, from the day after the close of each monthly period for which tax is due until the date of payment, any penalties and interest authorized herein. One or more than one determination may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(c)  Interest on deficiency or late payment. The amount of the determination made under subsection (b) of this section (without deduction for the collection allowance authorized in section 54-74 of this article) shall bear interest at a rate of one percent per month (or fraction thereof) from the first day after the close of the prior monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty on deficiency or late payment. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58, when an operator fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent of the determination (without deduction for the collection allowance authorized in section 54-74 of this article) or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent of the determination or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the county. In addition, the operator shall not be entitled to the collection allowance authorized in section 54-74 of this article. The late penalty will be strictly enforced; provided that, if the failure to make a return or to pay the full amount of the tax required is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the business license department in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. 
(e)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination under this section, the business license department may offset overpayment for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. However, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(B), if it is determined by the supervisor that overpayment of tax was made by the occupants to the operator, the entire amount of all overpayments of tax will be made to the business license department without any deduction for the collection allowance provided for in section 54-74 of this article. 
(f)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade tax. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58(a), in the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(g)  Service of notices. The business license department or its designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of its determination under this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his/her/its last known address as it appears in the records of the business license department. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(h)  Time limit for service of notice of deficiency determination. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the fifth day of the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
(i)  Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the business license department within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the supervisor. If the claim is approved by the board of commissioners, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts that are due and payable from the operator from which it was collected or by whom it was paid and the balance executors. 
(j)  Collection. The estimated tax together with applicable penalties and interest may be collected utilizing any of the enforcement methods set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-76. - Operator records. 
(a)  Records retention. Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep, for a period of at least three years, a folio and such other suitable records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rent charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county may, in writing, from time to time require. 
(b)  Examination of records. The business license department, or any person or entity authorized in writing by the county, may at all reasonable hours examine the folio, books, invoices, financial reports and other records of the operator and any other person liable for the tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-77. - Enforcement action and duties upon sale or closure of business. 
(a)  Action to collect tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the county attorney at the direction of the board of commissioners may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Return upon ceasing to operate; duty of successors of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. An operator must notify the business license department in writing within 30 days of closing its business. Further, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.1, if any operator becomes liable for any amount under this article and subsequent thereto sells or quits the business, such operator shall make a final return and payment of all tax due within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The operator's successors or assignees, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due until the former owner produces either a receipt from the business license department showing that the county has been paid the amount due or a certificate stating that no amount is due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount from the purchase price as required, the purchaser shall become personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties accruing under this article and unpaid by the former owner or assignor. The personal liability of the purchaser in such a case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquencies of the former owner. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-78. - Violations. 
(a)  In addition to any other violations for which criminal or civil penalties or punishments specifically are provided by applicable law, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article for which punishment is not otherwise provided. Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article or who shall fail to do anything required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Cherokee County and, upon conviction, shall be assessed with any penalty, including fine, confinement, or both, allowed by law for the violation of Cherokee County Ordinances. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In order to enforce this article or to correct or abate any violation of the article, the Cherokee County board of commissioners, in addition to other remedies, may institute actions for injunctive or other appropriate relief. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-79. - Severability; repealer. 
(a)  If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this article, as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances, shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners to provide separable and divisible parts. 
(b)  All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict with the terms of this article are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any ordinance or law which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of county, is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Sec. 54-80. - Effective date. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(g)(2), the effective date of this article shall be the first day of the second month following adoption. The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after the effective date of this article, including, but not limited to such occupancy that was entered into pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to such date. 
(Ord. of 6-7-16(1)) 
Secs. 54-81—54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON PROPERTY AND CASUALTY INSURERS 

Sec. 54-101. - Levy; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2)—(5). For purposes of this section, the term "gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as such term is used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Sec. 54-102. - Forwarding of copy of article to state insurance commissioner. 
The clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the state insurance commissioner within ten days of its enactment. 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; parking upon county property, § 38-60; parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county, with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 58-2. - Regulation of roads. 
It is hereby declared that Reavis Mountain Road is closed to any "through" truck traffic. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, 6-28-96) 
Sec. 58-3. - Regulation of speed limits within the county. 
ON SYSTEM 

 
SIGNS TO BE ERECTED BY THE GEORGIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS EFFECTIVE*** 
A.M. from 30 minutes prior to commencement times to 30 minutes after commencement time—School Days Only 
P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time—School Days Only 
**Waleska**—An agreement between the City of Waleska and the Cherokee County Sheriff's Office has been signed giving the Sheriff's Office permission to run speed detection devices inside the city limits of Waleska. 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE*** 
School Zone Speed Limit on all "off system" roads shall be 30 mph from 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement a.m. and from 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal p.m. on school days only  *** 
**Waleska** — An agreement between the City of Waleska and the Cherokee County Sheriff's Office has been signed giving the Sheriff's Office permission to run speed detection devices inside the city limits of Waleska. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-23, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2003-O-003, 3-18-03; Ord. of 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 58-4. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Large truck" means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and having a gross vehicular weight in excess of 36,000 pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet, or having in excess of three axles, except recreational vehicles, buses used in transportation of chartered parties, and government owned vehicles. 
(2)  "Residential subdivision" means an area with streets designed primarily for residential and accessory traffic that are primarily interior subdivision streets, specifically including but not limited to all residential areas platted and regulated by the Cherokee County Subdivision Regulations. 
(3)  "Person" means and shall extend and be applied to natural persons, as well as to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, including but not limited to and any owners, operators, lessees, or drivers of a large truck that is operated in violation of this section. 
(b)  Prohibition on through trucks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any large truck to travel those certain county roads set forth on Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance from which this section derives, as now or hereafter amended, unless the large truck's trip originates or ends on such road or is made for the purpose of making a delivery to a site on such road. All such roads on which large trucks are prohibited as set forth above shall be posted with "No Thru Trucks" signs at each end of such roads, and, at the board of commissioners' discretion, such "No Thru Trucks" signs may also be posted at the intersection of any such road with other roads. 
(2)  This section shall apply to roads specifically authorized herein by the board of commissioners and as set forth on the attached Exhibit "A" as now or hereafter amended by Resolution of the board. Upon adoption, this section shall apply immediately to those county roads listed on Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance from which this section derives and incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Prohibition on travel in residential subdivisions. No large truck shall enter, travel or park on a street in a residential subdivision in Cherokee County, except for the purpose of delivering goods to houses or points within such residential subdivision for short periods of time during daylight hours. Operators or owner/operators residing in subdivisions prior to the enactment of this section are exempt from this subsection of the section until such time that they voluntarily cease operations. 
(d)  Limited load streets, bridges and culverts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any on any street in the county where the weight of such vehicle, with or without loads, is in excess of the weight as limited by ordinance and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle over a bridge or culvert in the county over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. 
(2)  This section shall apply to bridges and/or culverts specifically authorized herein by the board of commissioners and as later added to or deleted from Exhibit "A" by Resolution of the board. Upon adoption, this section shall apply immediately to those county bridges and/or culverts listed on Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance from which this section derives and incorporated herein by reference. 
(e)  Overnight stay. No large truck or tractor-trailer shall enter, travel or park on a street in a residential subdivision or park on a right-of-way in Cherokee County for the purpose of an overnight stay by the driver or operator. 
(f)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment. Each day that the offense continues shall constitute a separate violation. The imposition of any fine against a person for any violation of this section shall not preclude a civil action against such person to recover for any damages caused by any such person or any such violation of this section, nor shall this section constitute a waiver of any rights the county may have to pursue a civil action against such person or to otherwise seek restitution, and all such rights are expressly reserved. 
(g)  Severability. Should a sentence, section, subsection or provision of this section or application thereof be declared unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect or impair the validity of the reminder of said section or the section as a whole or any part or application so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 20001-014, §§ 59-4—59-8, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 2015-O-004, 7-7-15; Ord. No. 2015-O-010, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-003, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 2017-O-007, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Editor's note— A list of roads, bridges and/or culverts is attached to Ord. No. 2017-O-007 as Exhibit "A" and is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 58-5. - Regulation of traffic flow. 
The intersection of Towne Lake Parkway, Towne Lake Hill South Drive and North Medical Parkway is hereby designated as "No U Turn" in all four directions. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to utilize said intersection in such a manner as to avoid the traffic signal located at said intersection. Any person found in violation of this section by a court of law shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or subject to imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-001, 3-18-03) 
Sec. 58-6. - Vehicle immobilization devices. 
(a)  Purpose. The county finds that the immobilization "booting" of vehicles by private persons or companies leads to unnecessary anger, conflict, a drain on public safety resources better spent elsewhere, and does not resolve the issue of improper use of a parking space. The county has determined vehicle immobilization services by private persons or companies to be unnecessary and not in the best interests of Cherokee County. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this document, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in this section, unless where the context clearly has a different meaning: 
Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
Vehicle immobilization device or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
Vehicle immobilization service shall mean a person, including sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in the unincorporated portions of Cherokee County whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(c)  Prohibition. Immobilization of the vehicle of another by use of a vehicle immobilization device, boot or other like devices is prohibited in unincorporated Cherokee County by private persons or companies. Law enforcement is exempt from such a prohibition. 
(d)  Violations. Any person(s), operator or vehicle immobilization service found to have violated this section may be prosecuted as provided in subsection (e). 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating this code section shall be subject to issuance of a citation, and if proven guilty before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or 60 days imprisonment, upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-002, § 1, 2-1-11) 
ARTICLE II. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 58-7. - Short title. 
This article will be known as and may be referred and cited as the "Motorized Carts Ordinance of Cherokee County." 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-8. - Findings. 
The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners finds that residents of certain neighborhoods and certain public streets located within the unincorporated area of Cherokee County desire that motorized carts be allowed to be driven with regular vehicle traffic. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, by adoption of this ordinance, shall allow the use of motorized carts within the parameters of state law, but the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners expresses no opinion as to whether the mixture of regular vehicle traffic and motorized carts upon the public streets and rights-of-way are safe. Given the safety concerns of Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners will approve a motorized cart district only upon receiving a request for such motorized cart use via the procedure set forth hereto and subject to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners' discretion to approve such motorized cart district by a finding that it meets the criteria of this ordinance. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, on behalf of itself, agents, employees and representatives of the county, do not waive any right of sovereign immunity or individual qualified immunity. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners places all citizens and guests on public notice that all drivers or occupants of motorized vehicles, given the disproportionate size of motorized carts in comparison to regular vehicular traffic, do knowingly and voluntarily assume all risks of property damage, injury or death in regard to the operation of any motorized cart. All liability for injury shall be the responsibility of the party causing such injury but in no way shall Cherokee County or any of its employees be liable for any action or inaction with regards to motorized carts authorized pursuant to the article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-9. - Definitions. 
(a)  All words, terms, and phrases when used in this article shall have the meaning prescribed to that word, term, or phrase as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings prescribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Authorized streets means all such streets, roads and public rights-of-way which have been authorized for motorized cart travel within a designated motorized cart district approved by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and are on file with the Cherokee County Engineering Department. The list of authorized streets is subject to amendment from time to time by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  County means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(3)  Motorized cart means all electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, which are commonly called and referred to as golf carts, and which are not capable of exceeding 20 miles per hour. Within this article, the terms "motorized cart," "golf cart," and "cart" shall have the same meanings; these are the only carts authorized for use under this article. 
(4)  Motorized cart district means the streets or roads approved for the use of motorized carts in a specific neighborhood, community, development, or other defined area by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)  Any other motorized cart or vehicle not included in the definition contained in section 58-9(b)(3) shall be banned and considered illegal to operate from public streets of unincorporated Cherokee County, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-10. - Criteria and procedure for consideration of motorized cart district. 
The following section outlines the procedures and criteria to be followed by the applicant(s) and the county in order to obtain motorized cart access on public roads. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, a "Motorized Cart District" shall be designated as a clearly defined area that has access to public roads and which has received approval from the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. In order to be considered for motorized cart use, Motorized Cart Districts shall meet and follow the criteria and procedures listed below. 
a.  Where motorized cart access is desired, a petition shall be submitted by the established and legally incorporated homeowner's association for the area where motorized cart access is being requested. For areas where motorized cart access is desired but no homeowner's association exists, a petition may be submitted by the residents of the area, however said petition shall require the signature of at least five separate parcel owners of the proposed Motorized Cart District. The petition must be returned to the county engineer who will verify property ownership (if applicable) using current county tax assessment records and/or proper status of the homeowner's association. The petition submitted shall include statements to confirm the following: 
1.  The Motorized Cart District for which motorized cart access is petitioned must have public roads that have a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less and must have access to public local roads as shown on the county road registry. 
2.  Motorized carts may only be operated inside the confines of the roads located in the Motorized Cart District and may not be used on other public roads that have not been approved for use. 
3.  Motorized carts are not allowed to travel on sidewalks, swales, trails, multiuse paths, or bicycle paths. 
4.  Operators of motorized carts are required to observe all traffic laws as if they were operating any other motor vehicle. 
b.  Upon receiving such a petition, the county engineer, or his/her designee, shall verify the area for which motorized cart access has been petitioned and determine whether the area meets the requirements for motorized cart usage. In addition, the county engineer, or his/her designee, shall identify proper locations for signage to be placed to identify the street/area as an authorized location for motorized cart use. 
c.  Upon a finding by the county engineer, or his/her designee, that the proposed Motorized Cart District is suitable for use and meets the requirements stated hereto, signs soliciting public comments shall be erected at each entrance to the proposed Motorized Cart District and such signs shall remain in place for at least 30 days. The county engineer, or his/her designee, shall receive and document any and all public comments during this time for consideration by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
d.  After completion of the 30 day period for public comments, the petition and all public comments shall be submitted for consideration to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners shall call for a public hearing to be held regarding the petition and such public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of Cherokee County at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the public hearing is to take place. 
e.  The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners shall consider the petition, staff recommendations, public comments received, and the results of the public hearing, and approve, deny or modify the petition and the Motorized Cart District boundaries in its sound discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-11. - Authorized user. 
Any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle driver's license and is at least 16 years of age may operate a motorized cart on the authorized streets and contained in the Motorized Cart District under the same restrictions placed upon such drivers in the operation of motor vehicles on the road of Georgia in compliance with O.C.G.A. tit. 40 and all other applicable state laws regarding the operation of motor vehicles. In addition, any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle instructional permit and is at least 15 years of age may operate a motorized cart in a Motorized Cart District and on authorized streets, so long as such person is accompanied in the front seat by a person who possesses a valid motor vehicle driver's license and is at least 18 years of age. A valid driver's license or instructional permit for the operation of a motor vehicle shall carry the same restrictions for use in a motorized cart authorized pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-12. - Minimal equipment required for motorized carts/insurance. 
(a)  All motorized carts operating on an authorized street, road, public right-of-way, or designated motorized cart district shall have, at a minimum, the following equipment: 
(1)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle, including a parking brake; 
(2)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(3)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the "off" position, or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the "off" position; 
(4)  Head lamps; 
(5)  Reflex reflectors; 
(6)  Tail lamps; 
(7)  A rearview mirror; 
(8)  Safety warning labels; 
(9)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof. 
(b)  Each person operating a motorized cart shall be liable for their own actions as stated in section 58-16 of this article. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a motorized cart in a Motorized Cart District or an authorized street should verify their insurance coverage is sufficient for such uses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-13. - Registration of motorized carts. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated over authorized streets to register the motorized cart with the county prior to operating the motorized cart on said authorized streets. The application for registration shall be filed with the Cherokee County on forms provided by the county. The application may, among other things, require the following information: owner's name; street address, mailing address, and telephone number; make, model, and identification, and/or serial number of the motorized cart; and such other information as may be reasonably required, as well as a general release statement and/or disclaimer of any liability by the County for accidents involving the registered motorized cart. Two decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by Cherokee County. 
(b)  The decals provided upon proper registration must be affixed to the sides or windshield of the motorized cart, or in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner/operator of such cart to penalties. The decal issued by Cherokee County shall be non-transferrable from the motorized cart for which it is obtained. 
(c)  Only those persons 16 years of age and older may register a motorized cart. Motorized cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(d)  The fee to register a motorized cart shall be set at $15.00 for a one year registration, $45.00 for a three year registration, or $75.00 for a five year registration. Each registration, regardless of when purchased, shall only be valid for the calendar year(s) and shall expire on December 31. 
(e)  Upon occurrence of a sale or transfer of a registered motorized cart to another person, the initial registration shall immediately expire and the new owner of the motorized cart shall be required to register the motorized cart if they wish to operate said cart on authorized streets or within a Motorized Cart District. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-14. - Operation of gasoline-powered motorized carts. 
(a)  Every gasoline-powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to, and including, the muffler(s) and exhaust pipe(s); 
(2)  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened; and 
(3)  The engine of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered motorized cart to operate, or permit the operation of, such gasoline-powered motorized cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, has been altered, rendered unserviceable or removed. 
(c)  Motorized carts which are powered by electric means are exempted from this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-15. - Operating regulations and special rules. 
(a)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets contained in the Motorized Cart District. 
(b)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the activity of racing motorized carts on authorized streets or in a Motorized Cart District. 
(d)  No person shall use a motorized cart to block public access, except for special events approved by the county. 
(e)  No user of a motorized cart shall loiter, or park on recreation path bridges or in underpasses or any other location where the parking of vehicles is prohibited. 
(f)  Pedestrians and bicyclists should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by users of motorized carts. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and the use thereof, including, but not limited to open container laws, while operating, riding in, or driving a motorized cart shall be required to be followed by all drivers, passengers, and operators of a motorized cart operating on an authorized street, road, public right-of-way, or designated motorized cart district. 
(h)  A motorized cart shall have no more than four passengers per cart, however, such allotment may be increased if each passenger has an individual seat for his/her use. 
(i)  No cart shall be driven on an authorized street, road, public right-of-way, or designated motorized cart district in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(j)  No motorized cart shall be driven or operated on any street, road, or public right-of-way in unincorporated Cherokee County that has not been designated a Motorized Cart District or otherwise authorized as an approved street under this article. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate, or permit the operation of, such motorized cart in any such method that violates this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-16. - Liability. 
The owner and/or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his/her own actions and assumes all responsibility for any such use. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance and verifying coverage in terms enough to cover the risk involved in using such motorized cart on an authorized street, road, public right-of-way, or designated motorized cart district. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-17. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The operation of motorized carts under the following circumstances shall not be subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The operation of motorized carts at golf courses, private clubs, or on private property, with the consent of the land owner; 
(2)  The operation of golf carts on private streets within gated or limited access communities; 
(3)  The operation of golf carts in connection with a parade, festival, or other special event authorized by the county, provided that the consent of the event sponsor is obtained and provided that such use only occurs during the special event; 
(4)  The use of golf carts by the sheriffs department or marshal's office on official law enforcement business or by other Cherokee County personnel for official business on county controlled property, including cemeteries, parks, green space, and other property as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 58-18. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a citation by the county marshal's office or the sheriffs office returnable to the magistrate court of Cherokee County and subject to a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 60 days' imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 1-9-18) 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 46; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Power of county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Payment of costs of electrical service for streetlights. 
(a)  The county water and sewerage authority, upon the adoption and passage of an appropriate ordinance, shall be authorized to make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient to bill customers of subdivisions for streetlights constructed and installed in subdivisions, and to pay the costs of electrical service for such streetlights. 
(b)  The City of Waleska, upon the adoption and passage of the appropriate ordinance, shall be authorized to make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient to bill customers of subdivisions for street lights constructed and installed in subdivisions, having water provided by the city, and to pay the cost for electrical service for such street lights. 
(Ord. of 9-23-86; Ord. No. 99-O-16, 7-13-99) 
Editor's note— Authority for the above provision derives from 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4776. 
Secs. 62-2—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 62-36. - Individual sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1, certain rules and regulations entitled "Rule 1-10 of the Cherokee County Board of Health for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems" are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners and incorporated in this section as if set out in full. 
(b)  An official copy of Rule 1-10 of the Cherokee County Board of Health for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Any person in violation of the regulations adopted in this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. Violations may be brought before the magistrate's court of the county by citation issued by the county sanitarian or his duly appointed representative. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-91) 
Secs. 62-37—62-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 62-81. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Cherokee County Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance." 
It is hereby determined that: 
Discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system; 
Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system; 
Therefore, Cherokee County adopts this ordinance to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system. 
It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 1, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of Cherokee County. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The marshal's office shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 2, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-83. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Cherokee County separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, Cherokee County streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by Cherokee County; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 62-83. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 3, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-84. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the Cherokee County Marshal's Office as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to Cherokee County separate storm sewer system. 
(4)  Nonstormwater discharges from infrequent, small volume activities limited to, residential car washing, house pressure washing and runoff from normally fertilized residential lawns. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the water and sewer authority. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the marshal's office requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 4, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2007-O-005, § 4, 9-18-07) 
Sec. 62-85. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the marshal's office prior to allowing discharges to the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 5, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-86. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The marshal's office shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the marshal's office. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the marshal's office ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The marshal's office shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the marshal's office to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The marshal's office may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the marshal's office. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the marshal's office and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the marshal's office access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the marshal's office has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the marshal's office is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the marshal's office may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 6, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-87. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Cherokee County separate storm sewer system, State Waters, or Waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the marshal's office within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 7, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 62-88. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the marshal's office is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The marshal's office is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 62-85(5). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the marshal's office finds that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the marshal's office may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the marshal's office by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the marshal's office. 
The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the marshal's office, or other appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the marshal's office, then representatives of the marshal's office may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to Cherokee County by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the engineering department shall deem appropriate, after the engineering department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the engineering department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the marshal's office may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the marshal's office may seek cumulative remedies. 
The marshal's office may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-005, § 8, 6-21-05) 
Chapter 66 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-O-8, adopted July 11, 1995, repealed former art. II, §§ 66-36—66-53, 66-76—66-80, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new art. II, §§ 66-36—66-61, to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276; restriction on authority of counties and municipalities to impose business license fee or occupational tax on wrecker services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1. 

Sec. 66-36. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Cherokee County, Georgia Wrecker Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-20, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-20, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-37. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the ensuing terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Abandoned vehicle as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1, it shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle, this shall include any automobile, vehicle of any kind or type or mechanical contrivance or part thereof which is in an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, inoperative, and which does not have a valid license plate; or which has been abandoned or discarded according to the definition "abandoned motor vehicle" set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle is "inoperative" if it is incapable of movement by its own power, or if it remains in place for a period of more than seven days, and in neither case is within a carport or parking way or driveway. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the county shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Approved wrecker service means any wrecker service, which submits a successful application under section 66-54 of this article and is assigned a zone and which otherwise, complies with the provisions hereof to qualify for the privilege of engagement by the marshal's office or sheriff's department for the removal or storage of vehicles. 
Basic tow job includes furnishing of wrecker and all work necessary to properly hook up a damaged or undamaged vehicle and tow it to a storage area. 
Damaged vehicle means any vehicle suffering such mechanical or structural damage to the extent that it cannot properly or safely be operated. 
GVW means gross vehicle weight. 
Heavy equipment means vehicles weighing more than one and one half tons or 15,000 pounds of GVW. 
Marshal's office means the Cherokee County Marshal's Office, its officers, agents or employees. 
Passenger cars, light trucks and similar vehicles shall mean any vehicle weighing up to 15,000 pounds of GVW. 
Property owner means the owner of property, or his authorized representative, upon which a vehicle to be removed is located. 
Response time means that the zone wrecker service will respond toward the scene of the traffic infringement as soon as possible after a call is received from the Cherokee County 911 dispatcher, marshal's office or sheriff's department. 
Undamaged vehicle means any vehicle, which has no or only minor structural or mechanical damage and is capable of being safely and properly operated. 
Vehicle owner means the owner of a vehicle or his authorized representative. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing or transporting wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. 
Wrecker service means any corporation, partnership or individual person, either its principal, agent or employee in the business of removing, towing and/or storing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles by the use of a wrecker. 
Zone means a geographical area established by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. This area is currently that geographical area contiguous with the boundaries of the sheriff's precincts of the sheriff's office of the county, but such area may be altered or changed by resolution of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-21, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-21, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-21, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 1, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-38. - Unapproved wrecker service to comply with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service, whether an approved wrecker service or not, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the unincorporated area of the county without complying with the provisions of this article. Further, any wrecker service doing business within unincorporated Cherokee County shall be required to obtain a business license from the county. The applicant for a business license shall be required to have proof of all documentation required by the Georgia Public Service Commission and to be approved and assigned a USDOT number by the Georgia Public Service Commissioner. This is to also include presentation of a valid certificate of insurance meeting the minimum requirements of the Georgia Public Service Commission and this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-22, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-22, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-22, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 2, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-39. - Identification of all wreckers. 
All wreckers which operate upon any of the streets of the unincorporated area of the county shall be clearly identified in compliance with the Georgia Public Service Commission Transportation Rule 1-7-1.02(d) and (e) as amended with the name and domicile of the wrecker service operating the wrecker and its Cherokee County business license number if so required. Services in a city in Cherokee County should have a copy of the city business license in cab of wrecker for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-23, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-23, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-23, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-40. - Prohibition against "monitor running". 
No wrecker service shall proceed to an accident scene by reason of any information received by monitoring police radio calls. Further, no service shall respond except through dispatch by the 911 center or at the request of the vehicle owner. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-25, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-25, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-25, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-41. - Wrecker services to use due care. 
(a)  Wrecker services shall determine the method and manner of removing vehicles; provided, however, that they shall exercise due care in removal operations and shall follow the direction of the officer directing the removal so as not to impede traffic or endanger the general public and property. 
(b)  The driver of each wrecker truck towing away any vehicle from the scene of a wreck shall also take away all parts belonging to the vehicle, which he is towing away. This would include broken or damaged parts, (plastic, fiberglass, or metal), broken or shattered glass or any other debris deemed a road hazard. In the case of fluid spills, originating from a vehicle involved in an accident; every effort should be made to clear the roadway of any anti-freeze, oil, grease, gasoline, diesel fuel, or other fluids associated with a motor vehicle. This could include the use of "oil dry" compounds, sand, clay, or other approved agents. The wrecker operator or company may be release from this responsibility by the investigating officer or fire department personnel due to circumstances at the scene of the accident. In the event of a major spill or one involving hazardous material, the wrecker operator should follow guidelines and instructions set by the Cherokee County Fire/EMA personnel in charge of the scene. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-26, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-26, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-26, § 3-25-26, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-42. - Information to be supplied to the marshal's office; notification to owner. 
(a)  Whenever any abandoned vehicle is removed without the request, direction or participation of the marshal's office or the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department, the wrecker service performing the removal shall, if the owner is unknown, within 72 hours of such removal, furnish to the sheriff's office the following information with respect to such vehicles tag number and description (including year, model, make, color and vehicle identification number). 
(b)  Upon receipt of such information, the marshal's office shall immediately take steps to ascertain the identity of the vehicle owner and notify him of the time and place of removal and of the present whereabouts of the vehicle. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall relieve any wrecker service of any of the requirements imposed by virtue of O.C.G.A. Tit. 40, Ch. 11, or by virtue of any other law with respect to duties, among others, to make diligent inquiries as to the ownership of vehicles and notification to owners. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-27, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-27, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-27, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-43. - Vehicle inventory; procedure. 
Whenever any vehicle is removed by a wrecker service at the direction of a sheriff's deputy, the sheriff's deputy shall make a thorough inventory of all equipment, accessories, personal articles and other items either attached to or located within the vehicle. Said inventory shall be completed on a form supplied by the sheriff's office and signed by the officer in charge of the removal. Upon acceptance of the vehicle and prior to its removal, the agent or employee of the wrecker service performing the removal shall sign the inventory form. The officer shall retain a copy and the wrecker service shall retain a copy for their files. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-28, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-28, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-28, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-44. - Wrecker services to hold vehicles upon direction of Sheriff. 
When specifically directed to do so by the sheriff's office, the wrecker service shall hold vehicles for evidence, confiscation or any other purposes permitted by law. Upon the written and signed authorization of the sheriff's office on a form prescribed by the sheriff's office, the wrecker services shall release any vehicle so held to the owner, his authorized representative or other person entitled by law to possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-29, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-29, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-29, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-45. - Operations confined to designated zones. 
An approved wrecker service shall confine its operations, insofar as marshal's office, 911 or sheriff's office calls are involved, to the zone assigned to it; provided, however, that a wrecker service may operate outside of its assigned zone in response to any emergency or other extraordinary situation when directed to do so by the marshal's office, 911 or the sheriff's office or in response to private calls. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-30, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-30, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-30, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-46. - Marshal's office calls to wrecker services; owner's choice of wrecker services. 
When, in the exercise of its authority to remove vehicles from the streets of the unincorporated portions of the county, the marshal's office or sheriff's office engages in a private wrecker service after the owner fails to engage a wrecker service or in the event of an emergency call to a wrecker service, the approved wrecker service assigned to the zone where the vehicle is located shall be called first. Any wrecker service dispatched by any agency of Cherokee County, as a nonconsent tow shall meet specified requirements of the Georgia Public Service Commission and be on file with 911 dispatch center. In the event of extraordinary circumstances or emergency, the marshal's office or sheriff's office shall be authorized to call any approved wrecker service outside the zone where service is required. A vehicle owner in ordinary, nonemergency situations may arrange a private wrecker service of his choice to remove his vehicle. The responding officer shall advise the vehicle owner of his option to call the wrecker service of the owner's choice. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-31, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-31, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-31, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-47. - County impoundment facility. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the marshal's office or the sheriff's office from providing its own impoundment facility upon county property for the purpose of storing or holding vehicles for evidence, confiscation or any other purpose permitted by law. Should a wrecker service tow a vehicle to the county impound lot at the request of an authorized county agency, the wrecker service will provide a bill for towing and receive payment for towing from Cherokee County or the agency requesting the tow. If the vehicle is released from "hold" back to the wrecker service all money paid to the service is to be reimbursed to Cherokee County agency paying original bill. Storage cannot be charged for time vehicle was in county possession. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-32, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-32, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-32, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-48. - Requirements for approved wrecker service impound facilities. 
(a)  Each impound facility of the approved wrecker service must be located within Cherokee County, Georgia. The impound lot must be located in the zone approved by the marshal's office and where the wrecker service provides its operations. The impound lot must be owned or leased by the applicant and/or zone holder. 
(b)  The gate to the impound lot shall be and remain locked during the hours of darkness except to provide reasonable ingress and egress in connection with wrecker service operations. 
(c)  Each approved wrecker service shall submit an inventory every two weeks of all vehicles remaining in its possession whose owner has not been identified and notified. The inventory shall be completed on a form supplied or approved by the sheriff's office and submitted to the sheriff's office's criminal investigation unit. 
(d)  The requirements for the impound facility are as follows: 
(1)  Impound lot must be located on any properly zoned location in Cherokee County and complying with all the respective county ordinances. 
(2)  Must have a facility that will hold 50 vehicles. Facility must be located wherein the wrecker service provides its operations. 
(3)  Must have entire lot adequately illuminated during the hours of darkness to discourage and detect attempts at theft or vandalism. 
(4)  All fences must be five foot chain link, barbed wire running at the top, with gates that can be securely locked for a total of five feet. 
(5)  An attendant shall be on the property during normal business hours, 8:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, able to respond to a request for releasing of vehicles and providing ingress and egress immediately. Reasonable accommodation shall be made during normal hours or on the weekends. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-33, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-33, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-33, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-49. - Insurance required. 
(a)  Approved wrecker services shall carry liability insurance policies with a minimum of $1,000,000.00, in liability and cargo/garage keepers' liability insurance coverage for any and all claims or judgments resulting from loss or damage occasioned by negligence or malfeasance on the part of the wrecker service while conducting any activities as an approved wrecker service. Such policies shall provide full loss, theft or damage benefits payable to any vehicle or property owner suffering loss, theft or damage with respect to any vehicle or to equipment, accessories, personal articles or other items either attached to or located within a vehicle removed and/or stored while such vehicle is in the custody, control and possession of the wrecker service. In the event there is a loss and the wrecker service's insurer does not pay the vehicle or property owner suffering loss, theft or damage within a reasonable period, then the wrecker service shall be liable to the owner for his damages. 
(b)  All drivers responding to county calls shall be covered by worker's compensation insurance. 
(c)  All certificates of insurance required under this article shall include Cherokee County as a certificate holder and additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-34, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-34, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-34, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 3, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-50. - Prohibition against limitation or disclaimer of wrecker service liability; independent contractors prohibited. 
No approved wrecker service shall limit or disclaim, contractually or otherwise, any liability it may have under the laws of this state with respect to loss, damage, or theft of any vehicle it removes or stores or the loss, damage, or theft of any equipment, accessories, personal articles, or other items either attached to or inside vehicles so removed or stored. No approved wrecker service may utilize independent contractors as drivers responding to county calls under this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-35, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-35, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-35, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 4, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-51. - Wrecker service advisory board; functions. 
(a)  The heretofore existing wrecker service advisory and appeals board is hereby abolished. There is hereby reconstituted a board to be called the wrecker service advisory and appeals board (the "wrecker service advisory board") consisting of five members who shall be residents of the county and who shall serve with or without compensation as may be approved by the county board of commissioners. Each member of the board of commissioners shall have one appointee to the wrecker service advisory board. At least two of these appointees shall be employed in, actively engaged with, or specifically knowledgeable about the wrecker service industry. The terms of office of the members of the wrecker service advisory board shall run concurrently with the term of the member of the board of commissioners who appointed that particular member. In any event, such term shall not exceed four years in the absence of reappointment. Members of the wrecker service advisory board may be removed at any time by the appointing member of the board of commissioners, for cause or for no cause. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve as members of the wrecker service advisory board until their successors have been appointed. 
(b)  The wrecker service advisory board shall elect from its membership a chairperson and other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar-year basis and may be re-elected for succeeding terms. 
(c)  The wrecker service advisory board shall meet at least two times per year, but may meet more frequently as may be determined necessary by the chairman of the wrecker service advisory board. 
(d)  The wrecker service advisory board shall recommend from time to time changes with respect to the fee schedule and any proposed changes in the ordinance. Any such recommendations shall be presented to the county board of commissioners for its consideration. 
(e)  When requested to do so, the wrecker service advisory board will meet to hear complaints or charges against any approved wrecker service assigned to a zone in Cherokee County, Georgia. Charges brought against a wrecker service company or representative or employee of a wrecker service company will be heard after proper notice has been filed and served. These charges may include qualifications for service, equipment, quality of service, fees, public complaints, law enforcement complaints, and various other services rendered by a wrecker service that may affect the motoring public. 
(f)  The wrecker service advisory board may take such action as it deems appropriate in its discretion, including without limitation, suspension or removal of the approved wrecker service from the county's approved list. 
(g)  The wrecker service advisory board shall adopt a fair and equitable standard of rules and regulations governing any and all hearings brought before it so as to protect the rights of all parties involved and to give due process to all parties. 
A copy of such rules and regulations governing a hearing shall be available to anyone requesting a copy and to individuals requesting a hearing. 
The right for any party to be represented by legal counsel is acceptable, however, the wrecker service advisory board is not a court of law, and any person coming before it shall receive a fair hearing with or without legal counsel. 
(h)  The wrecker service advisory board may issue such decision as may be appropriate in the circumstance, including, but not limited to, revocation of approval as an approved wrecker service or suspension of approved wrecker service privileges. No suspension, with or without conditions, shall exceed a period of three months. 
(i)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the wrecker service advisory board may file a notice of appeal with the board of commissioners within ten days of the date of the wrecker service advisory board decision by submission of a written request for the appeal to the marshal's office. Should the board of commissioners choose to hear the appeal, the aggrieved party shall be given at least three days' notice in advance of the date of a public hearing with respect to such appeal. The board of commissioners reserves the right not to hear an appeal. If an appeal is heard by the board of commissioners, they may affirm, reverse, vacate, or modify of the wrecker service advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-36, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-36, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-36, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 5, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-52. - Adoption of fee schedule; notice; public hearing. 
(a)  When any recommendation with respect to the fee schedule is considered, the board of commissioners shall take action with respect thereto by way of a public hearing, giving at least 15 days' notice to the public and to all approved wrecker services affected thereby of such hearing. After such hearing, the board of commissioners may take such action as it deems appropriate. 
(b)  Upon adoption by the board of commissioners of said fee schedule or amendments thereto, no approved wrecker service shall charge fees or prices in excess thereof for any service performed under this Code. The initial approved fee schedule is attached to the ordinance from which this article derives, as Exhibit "A". Said fee schedule shall remain in full force and effect until changed pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  A copy of any approved fee schedule or amendment shall be on file with the clerk of the board of commissioners and with the Cherokee County Marshal's Office, and may be amended from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. A copy of any approved fee schedule or amendment shall be furnished to each approved wrecker service. 
(d)  Each approved wrecker service shall post in a conspicuous place on its premises a sign stating the following: 
"The maximum fees, which may be charged by wrecker services for removal and/or storage for public calls, have been established by bid and/or a county ordinance." Anyone is entitled to a copy of the fee schedule upon request. 
Inquiries and complaints concerning any fees charged should be made to the county marshal's office or the wrecker service advisory board. 
(e)  Each approved wrecker service shall furnish to any person so requesting a current copy of said fee schedule. 
(f)  Other requirements applicable: 
(1)  When the wrecker service arrives on the scene, the investigating law enforcement officer will make a notation to be included on the impound sheet as to his time of arrival, and will make a second notation of the time the wrecker service leaves the scene with the tow. This time will be considered the official time for time charged by the wrecker service, above the prescribed times set in the official and current fee schedule. In the event the wrecker service should arrive before the law enforcement unit, the officer will ascertain its time of arrival, if possible, by talking with the motorist; if not, by ascertaining the time from the wrecker service driver. The law enforcement officer will then be responsible for noting the time the wrecker service departs from the scene. The basic fees as listed will cover any charges of the wrecker service for responding from its place of business to the scene back to the wrecker service impound lot or to any other location within the wrecker service's zone as requested by the vehicle owner. Any request for tow by the owner of the vehicle outside Cherokee County or outside the wrecker service's zone will be at a cost, which is mutually agreed upon by the wrecker service operator and the vehicle owner. No so-called recovery fee or "bird dog" fee of any type not specifically permitted by the ordinance will be allowed, in connection with fulfilling the responsibilities of the zone wrecker service. 
(2)  Should a mistake be made by the 911 center dispatcher, in dispatching the wrong wrecker service, no charge can be made by the zone wrecker service who responds nor will any charge be made for its return to its place of business. 
EXHIBIT "A"  CHEROKEE COUNTY TOWING FEES 

 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-37, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-37, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-37, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2005-O-007, 9-21-05; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 6, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-53. - Daily storage charge; charges for first 24 hours storage prohibited. 
No approved wrecker service shall charge in excess of the fees for storage as outlined in the attached rate schedule. In any event, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for any and all storage fees and incurred by the wrecker service. In the event, that the county directs that a wrecker service be required to impound a vehicle at a county impound lot, then the county shall be responsible for towage fees. 
It shall be the duty of the wrecker service to hold vehicles impounded by the county until such time as said vehicles are released by the sheriff's department or pursuant to court order. In any event, the wrecker service shall assess the storage fees against the owner of the vehicle and not the county. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-38, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-38, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-38, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 66-54. - Zone assignments; zone boundaries; method of awarding zones. 
(a)  Initially, the marshal's office shall approve up to the number of four wrecker services per zone as such zones exist or are approved from time to time within the county. Assignment of a zone for an approved wrecker service shall be until further notice from the marshal's office. Each zone shall be approved by the board of county commissioners. Approved wrecker services shall have the exclusive assignment to a zone insofar as dispatch calls are involved, as the same may exist from time to time. The 911 dispatcher shall, to the best extent possible, alternate and evenly divide wrecker calls between the zone holders. However, the county shall have no liability to a wrecker service company for performing any act under this Code. Approved wrecker services shall retain their zone assignment until their successors are assigned. 
(b)  In the event any zone should become vacant by virtue of revocation of privileges, creation of a new zone or other cause, the board of commissioners shall publish in the official county newspaper, a notice of such vacancy and a request for applications to fill same, once a week for two weeks. The notice shall specify when applications must be submitted. In no event shall a wrecker service which is selected to fill a vacancy retain its zone assignment beyond the initial term provided in subsection (a) above, unless it is reapproved to continue as an approved wrecker service for that zone. 
(c)  The application shall be submitted on a form to be furnished by the marshal's office and shall be accompanied by a $250.00 nonrefundable application fee. Such application shall set forth the zone to which the wrecker service is applying for assignment and shall include: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of wrecker service, including: if corporation, names and addresses of stockholders; if partnership, names and addresses of partners, if proprietorship, name and address of proprietor. 
(2)  A complete list of the equipment must be attached. 
(3)  A list of the names of the personnel who will be employed by the wrecker service, including any information concerning their training to operate a wrecker. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance showing compliance with section 66-49. 
(d)  The application fee may be altered by resolution of the Commissioners of Cherokee County from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be on file with the Clerk of Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and with the Cherokee County Marshal's Office. 
(e)  The marshal's office shall investigate all applications, such investigations to include, among other things, a determination that the applicant has complied with the requirements of section 66-49, and a review of the driver operating records and any records of adjudications of guilt of the personnel to be employed by the wrecker service. 
(f)  No zone assignment shall be effective until the applicant has obtained a valid county business license. A zone assignment shall be deemed automatically revoked if the wrecker service suffers expiration or revocation of its county business license. 
(g)  New applicants in new zones (not existing) shall be awarded on a random selection basis as provided herein. Each applicant shall be allowed to apply for two zones and such application shall be submitted in a sealed envelope, which shall remain sealed until the random selection process as set forth herein. 
(1)  However, no applicant shall be awarded more than one zone, and once an applicant has been awarded a zone, that applicant's further application shall be withdrawn, and the applicant shall not be available for further award of zone in Cherokee County. Each applicant shall designate the two zones for which the applicant is applying. All applications for each zone shall be separated and placed into the random drawing for that zone. 
(2)  Only applications deemed qualified and approved for processing by the marshal's office shall be eligible to participate in this random selection process. Once all applications have been divided into zones, the marshal's office shall, in public, choose randomly two applications from the group of applicants for each zone and the two applicants so chosen, in random, in public, shall be awarded such zones. Once the two applicants are chosen, as provided herein, the names of the applicants shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners at its next regular meeting for approval. In the event there is only one applicant for any zone, that applicant shall be awarded the entire zone. In the event there are no applicants for any zone, the marshal's office shall reopen the zone for applications as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-39, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-39, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-39, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2004-O-008, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 7, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-55. - Alteration of zones. 
Any change in the boundaries of an approved wrecker zone or the creation of an additional wrecker zone shall be by recommendation of the wrecker service advisory board and approval by the board of commissioners. No person shall be authorized to challenge zones approved in this manner and no vested rights are granted under this Code to any such change in zone, it being understood that the board of commissioners is solely responsible for the establishment of zones as necessary. The award of a wrecker service in such new or additional zone shall be handled as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-55, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-40, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-40, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 8, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-56. - Written contract; equipment specifications. 
(a)  Once the zones have been finally awarded, a written, signed contract shall be entered into between Cherokee County, Georgia, and the approved wrecker service in a form approved by the county. 
(b)  No application shall be processed under this Code unless the applicant shall certify that the applicant currently owns or leases the equipment as such equipment is described in Exhibit "B", attached to the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(1)  In the event applicant does not currently own or lease the equipment as described in Exhibit "B," applicant must certify that the applicant shall, upon the commencement of the zone award, own or lease the equipment described in Exhibit "B", attached to the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(2)  Additionally, in the event applicant does not currently own or lease the equipment, applicant shall deliver, at the time of submitting the application, a $5,000.00 bond (in the form of a check, cash, or money order) payable to Cherokee County, and such $5,000.00 bond shall be forfeited by applicant in the event that a zone is awarded through the random selection process, but the applicant thereafter fails to comply with any provision of this Code. The bond shall be returned to the new applicant upon either of the following conditions: 
a.  Applicant is not selected through the random selection process; or 
b.  Applicant fully complies with all provisions of this Code after having been selected by the random selection process. 
Applicant shall comply with the equipment specifications in this Code on or before the effective date of the award of the zone. The effective date of the award of the zone shall be the date on which the board of commissioners approves the applicant selected by the marshal from the random selection process. In the event the applicant does not comply with the equipment requirement or other provision of this Code after having been selected in the random selection process, the zone shall be reopened for the purposes of awarding to a replacement zone holder. 
EXHIBIT "B"  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS 
All zone applicants shall be required to meet the following requirements and specifications prior to being accepted as a qualified bidder or zone holder in Cherokee County, Georgia. 
1.  Insurance 
A.  Liability insurance as provided by Georgia law per Georgia Public Service Commission. 
B.  $50,000.00 cargo and/or garage keepers' liability insurance. 
C.  Certificate of insurance to submitted with application. 
2.  Equipment. Must own, lease or be purchasing and have complete care, custody and control of: 
A.  Three wreckers/flatbeds, (10,000) G.V.W., designed for towing cars and light trucks. 
B.  All tow vehicles must be commercially manufactured and rated by the manufacturer. 
3.  Accessories. Each wrecker shall have the following accessories at all times: 
a.  1 Snatch block per cable rated for the respective winch. 
b.  2 Scotch blocks rated for the truck. 
c.  1 container for trash 
d.  1 Industrial rated push broom. 
e.  1 DOT approved fire extinguisher. 
f.  1 Emergency amber beacons with proper permits. 
g.  1 set of white working lights adjusted to rear of the wrecker. 
h.  1 flashlight. 
i.  1 flat shovel. 
j.  Proper equipment and straps to tow or transport motorcycles, 4-wheelers, etc. 
k.  Minimum 40 pounds oil dry absorbent. 
4.  Business owners/driver background experience 
A.  All employed drivers and operators of wreckers shall have a valid State of Georgia driver's license of the class required for the size truck operating and have in his possession all medical and exam cards required by the State of Georgia, the Georgia Public Service Commission, The United States Department of Transportation and this Code. 
B.  Company must have been in the towing business in Cherokee County, Georgia for at least three years. 
5.  Licensing and permits 
A.  Company must have a valid Cherokee County Business License or a valid business license issued by the city where the wrecker service and impound lot is located prior to submitting an application for zone privileges. 
B.  Company must be registered with the G.P.S.C. and have the required state permits prior to application for bid. 
C.  Company must have other applicable permits. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-41, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-41, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-41, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 9, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-57. - Due cause for denial of application. 
The marshal's office shall have due cause to refuse to process any application in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to obtain any paper or document necessary in pursuant of its business as may be required by any officer, agency or office of the county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(2)  The applicant has supplied false information to the marshal's office or the business license bureau, or has failed to provide or maintain information or certification of insurance required by this article. 
(3)  The applicant intends to violate the law, ordinance or resolution regulating such business or to violate any regulation made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business. 
(4)  The applicant, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing of its application, has suffered revocation of its wrecker service zone privileges, has engaged in any fraudulent business transaction punishable by the laws of this state, or has engaged in any act or practice with respect to its business designated as unlawful in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393, the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975. 
(5)  The applicant does not have adequate personnel or equipment to service the zone requested. No applicant shall utilize the services of independent contractors to support its application or to otherwise function as an approved wrecker service. 
(6)  The applicant does not have an impound facility meeting the requirements of section 66-48. 
(7)  Each applicant, and all drivers (whether employees or independent contractors) and principals associated with the applicant, shall be required to submit to a police background check, and the existence of any of the following items shall result in a denial of the application. Owners and principals shall be examined for a ten-year period, and drivers shall be examined for a three-year period. A conviction, plea of guilty, or entry of a nolo contendre plea of any of the following shall result in a denial of the application: 
a.  Any felony crime. 
b.  More than one misdemeanor crime of an aggravated nature. 
c.  Any suspension or revocation of driving privileges, subject to a case-by-case review. 
d.  Any serious traffic offense as follows: 
1.  Reckless driving as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
2.  More than one "driving under the influence" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 
3.  Homicide by vehicle as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-393. 
4.  Serious injury by vehicle as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-394. 
5.  Fleeing, eluding, or impersonating a law enforcement officer as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 
e.  Any crime of moral turpitude. 
(8)  The applicant would be unable to service the zone in a reasonable response time; such response time shall be no more than 30 minutes during normal traffic and normal weather and no more than 45 minutes during rush hour traffic or inclement weather or other abnormal conditions, all while obeying all traffic laws. 
(9)  Any applicant may appeal the marshal's denial of its application within ten days of said denial by submission of a written letter of appeal to the county marshal's office. The appeal will be to the county board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may uphold the denial, approve the application for processing, or take such appropriate action as it deems necessary. The board of commissioners will conduct a hearing on the appeal within 45 days of the appeal request. 
(10)  All zone holders shall notify the marshal's office in writing of any material change of the applicant or any employee thereof or any business change in status within 72 hours of such change, which change shall effect any requirement contained in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-42, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-42, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-42, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, §§ 10—13, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-58. - Revocation or suspension of zone privileges—Authorized. 
(a)  The marshal's office may, for due cause, as defined in subsection 66-59(d), suspend or revoke zone privileges of any approved wrecker service. No suspension, with or without conditions, shall exceed a period of three months. 
(b)  During the period of suspension of a wrecker service's zone privilege or until the board of commissioners takes action pursuant to subsection (c) hereof, other approved wrecker services within the zone will assume calls for a suspended wrecker service subject to routine calls by the marshal's office, the sheriff's office, and/or the 911 dispatch center in accordance with section 66-45. 
(c)  In the event of revocation of zone privileges, the board of commissioners shall declare said zone vacant and fill same according to those provisions contained in said section 66-54. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-43, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-43, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-43, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 15, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-59. - Same—Notice of hearing; due cause. 
(a)  The wrecker service advisory board shall provide a wrecker service with a hearing prior to a suspension, by the marshal's office, of more than seven days duration or revocation of its zone privileges, giving the wrecker service at least three days' notice of the time and place for hearing. 
(b)  A revocation shall terminate all authority and permission with respect to zone privileges. Any wrecker service whose zone privileges have been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for such privileges for a period of not less than one year from the final date of revocation. 
(c)  Any wrecker service whose zone privileges have been revoked or suspended by the marshal's office and/or the wrecker service advisory board may file a notice of appeal with the board of commissioners within ten days from the date of such revocation or suspension by submission of a written request for appeal to the marshal's office. Should the board of commissioners choose to hear the appeal the wrecker service shall be given at least three days' notice in advance of the date of a public hearing with respect to such appeal. The board of commissioners reserves the right not to hear an appeal. If an appeal is heard by the board of commissioners, they may affirm, reverse, vacate, or modify the action appealed. 
(d)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of zone privileges shall consist of any of the following, with respect to the wrecker service: 
(1)  Violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulation such business; 
(2)  The wrecker service has supplied false information in connection with its application or provision of wrecker services; 
(3)  The licensee has failed to obtain, or has suffered expiration, suspension or revocation of, any paper or document necessary in pursuit of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, authority or office of the county, state or the United States, under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the county, state or United States, including without limitation, the requisite business license and insurance required by the article; 
(4)  The wrecker service has failed to comply with any provision of this article; 
(5)  The wrecker service has engaged in any fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of this state; 
(6)  The wrecker service has made any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication, oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the wrecker service deals in pursuit of its business. The term "misrepresentation of fact" as used herein shall embrace not only express misrepresentations, but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the wrecker services conduct, including acts and omissions; 
(7)  The wrecker service fails to maintain adequate equipment or personnel to perform the services required; 
(8)  The wrecker service fails to properly maintain and provide an impound lot in the assigned zone meeting requirements of this article; 
(9)  The wrecker service repeatedly fails to respond to calls within a reasonable period of time or lack of response thereof; 
(10)  The wrecker service has engaged in monitor (scanner) running; 
(11)  The wrecker service has failed to provide 24-hour, seven days a week service; 
(12)  The wrecker service has violated rates listed on the approved fee schedule; 
(13)  The wrecker service fails to properly clear roadway of debris as required by this Code and state and federal laws that may apply; or 
(14)  The wrecker service has engaged in any act or practice designated as unlawful in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393, the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-45, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-44, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-44, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2007-O-007, § 16, 10-2-07) 
Sec. 66-60. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to six months, or both. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any wrecker service may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunctions in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of the county. 
(c)  Violations of provisions of this article by any wrecker service shall be due cause for revocation of any Cherokee County business license, after notice and hearing before the wrecker service advisory board and appeals board. 
(d)  Violations of provisions of this article by any approved wrecker service shall be due cause for revocation of any zone assignment, after notice and hearing as provided in this article. 
(e)  The above remedies are cumulative to each other. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-46, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-46, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-46, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 60-61. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on the date of adoption of this Code by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. All existing zone assignments will remain in effect until new zones are assigned pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
All existing wrecker services approved and currently functioning shall continue to operate until such time as new zones are assigned pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8, § 3-25-47, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-O-008, § 3-25-47, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 01-O-20, § 3-25-47, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 66-62—66-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license means the license required of all persons engaged in business in the unincorporated areas of the county as set forth in chapter 78, concerning licenses, permits and businesses, as amended. 
Chauffeur means, for purposes of this article, any person with a State of Georgia driver's license who meets the qualifications as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10 and who is authorized by the public service commission to drive a sedan, limousine, extended limousine, van or minibus. 
Director means the director of public safety. 
Dispatcher means a person assigned to a base of operations, in contact with taxicabs of the licensee's company having access to a telephone to talk with passengers or place phone calls in the event of an emergency. 
Domicile means the place where the corporate establishment is maintained; its principal place of business. 
Licensee means a person licensed by the county business license office to engage in the vehicle for hire business. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and as a limousine. Limousines and limousine carriers shall be fully regulated by the state under the public service commission. 
Motor vehicle safety standards means standards promulgated by the public safety department for approval by the board of commissioners that all vehicles for hire regulated under this article must meet. 
Operator's permit means the written authority granted by the public safety department to persons who qualify to operate vehicles for hire. Sometimes referred to as driver's permit. 
Permittee means a person granted a permit to operate vehicles for hire in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Public safety department means the marshal's office. 
Sedan means any luxury or nonluxury sedan or town car type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five passengers and the driver and which does not contain a taximeter designed to measure electronically or mechanically the distance traveled or time. 
Sedan carrier means any person operating a service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation as a motor common carrier for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of sedans driven by chauffeurs on the basis of telephone contract, written contract or other prearrangement. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used as a public conveyance which does not meet the requirements of a limousine, is not a van, minibus or sedan, has a taximeter and is subject to the rules and regulations of this article. 
Taxicab stand means any area on privately owned property which is approved and designated for the parking, stopping or standing of taxicabs by the property owner or person lawfully responsible for the property for the purpose of accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee in exchange for transportation by or other use of the taxicabs. Such designation must be made in writing granting express authority to the licensee to operate from or within a taxicab stand by the property owner or person responsible for the property and kept on file at the business license office for each current year of the designation. 
Valid complaint means a complaint against an operator or business to the business license office where the complainant provides his name, address and substance of complaint, and expresses a willingness to attend any hearing regarding his complaint. 
Van means any motor vehicle, other than a limousine, extended limousine, minibus or a sedan, with a designed seating capacity for no more than 15 passengers, including the driver. 
Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. For the purposes of this article, vehicles for hire shall mean taxicabs and sedans. 
Vehicle permit sticker means a sticker issued to a licensee upon proof of insurance and verification of compliance with county vehicle mechanical safety standards, to be placed on each vehicle for hire operated under this article and renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2010-O-006, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 66-71. - Persons deemed engaged in business of vehicles for hire. 
Any person who is within the unincorporated areas of the county engages in picking up passengers and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by an agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting is deemed to be engaged in the business of vehicles for hire. Persons may operate vehicles for hire as a home occupation, so long as all such rules and regulations relating to home occupations are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-72. - Sedan carriers and chauffeurs exempt from certain provisions. 
(a)  The following provisions of this article shall not apply to sedan carriers: 
(1)  Subsection 66-88(c)(4), regarding a copy of the rate schedule and operation hours. 
(2)  Subsection 66-88(c)(8), regarding dispatcher's address and operating hours. 
(3)  Subsection 66-90(1)a, regarding submitting a company logo and/or identification color scheme. 
(4)  Subsections 66-75(a), (b) and (c), regarding vehicle markings and rates. 
(5)  Subsection 66-76(c), regarding the prominent display of the telephone number of the business license office. 
(6)  Subsection 66-83(a), regarding the first sentence pertaining to notification of a dispatcher concerning personal property left behind. 
(7)  Subsection 66-84(a), second sentence, regarding display of the business license office telephone number. 
(b)  The following provisions shall not apply to a chauffeur if such chauffeur can show that he has provided substantially the same information to the public service commission within the last 12 months: 
(1)  Subsection 66-88(c), regarding submitting to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. 
(2)  Subsection 66-93(c), regarding submitting to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. 
(c)  All other provisions of this article shall remain in full force and effect with regard to sedan carriers and chauffeurs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-73. - Previous denial or revocation of business license or operator's permit. 
All persons who have had their business license or operator's permit revoked must reapply for a license or permit. No license or operator's permit shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the application the applicant for a license, operator's permit or renewal has had an application denied or a license or operator's permit revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-74. - Vehicle safety standards; verification. 
(a)  Each person operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall maintain each vehicle thus operated in a good, safe and serviceable mechanical condition. 
(b)  The public safety department shall recommend minimum motor vehicle safety standards for approval by the board of commissioners. These standards will be filed with the clerk of the county, the business license office and the public safety department. All persons or entities operating, owning or leasing vehicles for hire shall be presumed to have knowledge of such standards. All vehicles for hire operating on the roads and streets of the unincorporated areas of the county will be required to maintain their motor vehicles in compliance with such standards. A verification statement that the motor vehicles to be used in the business meet or exceed the requirements and standards approved by the board of commissioners shall be required before vehicles permit stickers may be issued. Such verification must be executed by the sole proprietor, named partner or president or CEO of a corporation. 
(c)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time by the public safety department and business license office. A vehicle found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and will remain removed from service until adequate proof is provided to the director of public safety or his designee or the supervisor of the business license office that the vehicle is compliant with the standards approved by the county. Proof that a vehicle has been brought into compliance with the standards shall not affect the ability to assess any and all civil or criminal penalties or actions against the business or driver for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-75. - Vehicle markings; rates. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall plainly and prominently advertise the name and telephone number of the person who holds the business license to operate the vehicle. Such advertisement shall be permanently affixed to both sides of the vehicle. In addition, each vehicle shall have affixed to both sides the county business license number, lettering at least two inches in height. 
(b)  A schedule of rates and hours of operation shall be marked on the side of the taxicab so as to be plainly visible to persons seeking to engage such vehicle for hire and shall be filed with the business license office by the licensee. 
(c)  Each taxicab shall have a taxi rooflight mounted on the roof of the vehicle. Such rooflight shall have a lighting system functional for nighttime operation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-76. - Interior requirements of vehicles for hire. 
(a)  The interior of each vehicle for hire shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of foreign matter and offensive odors. There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. 
(b)  All vehicles for hire shall present a clean environment for passengers. 
(c)  The telephone number of the business license office shall be prominently displayed within the taxicab, designating such number as the number to call when filing complaints. 
(d)  Permittees and licensees shall be responsible for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-77. - Parking of taxicabs. 
The driver of a taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a taxicab stand, except that this section shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, and from making emergency repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-78. - Daily dispatch log sheets. 
In order to maintain a license to operate a vehicle for hire service, a licensee must maintain daily dispatch log sheets, which shall be kept on file at the licensed business premises for a minimum of one year. Dispatch log sheets shall indicate all passengers carried, the time, place of entry and destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-79. - Cruising. 
Operators of taxicabs are prohibited from cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the unincorporated areas of the county or any private property for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Licensees under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-80. - Call jumping. 
Licensees under this article shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-81. - Appearance and hygiene of drivers. 
Drivers of vehicles for hire must practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. Proper dress shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle-length pants, a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-82. - Business audits. 
Each person licensed to do business under the provisions of this article and chapter 78, including limousine carriers, shall be subject to audit by the county. The county shall conduct such audit at reasonable times and with prior notice to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-83. - Drivers' duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Drivers of taxicabs shall notify their dispatcher of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire and such property shall be noted on the daily dispatch log sheets. Within 24 hours of discovery of any personal property left by a passenger, a driver shall forward such property to the public safety department or to its company's headquarters. Licensees shall maintain an accurate log of all private property held by them and the names of all persons claiming and receiving such property for a minimum of one year. 
(b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire who is not permitted and for any person who is not licensed to solicit or engage passengers within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(d)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(e)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin or religious belief. 
(f)  No driver shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers in a taxicab while transporting a paying passenger or passengers except for the purpose of driver training. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate his vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else, or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for a driver to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous, or unless street or area conditions do not permit a safe discharge to either the passenger or driver. 
(i)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving vehicle. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for drivers to drive, or for companies or other entities to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have a valid inspection sticker, is not validly insured or, if a taxicab, has an unsealed or improperly working taxifare meter. 
(k)  Persons or other entities operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall be prohibited from allowing such vehicles to be operated by persons not holding valid operator permits. 
(l)  Drivers shall not be required to carry more than $15.00 in change. 
(m)  Upon request of a passenger of a taxicab, drivers shall give receipts showing the amount of fare paid, name of company, license number, number of passengers, location of trip origination and location of trip termination. Upon request of a passenger of a sedan carrier, drivers of sedans shall give receipts showing the amount paid. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-84. - Complaints; records; hearings. 
(a)  The business license office shall be responsible for receiving complaints concerning the operation of vehicles for hire in the unincorporated areas of the county. Pursuant to sections 66-75 and 66-76, the telephone number of the business license office shall be prominently displayed outside and inside the taxicab and shall designate such number as the number to call for filing complaints. 
(b)  The business license office shall maintain true and accurate records of the names and identification numbers of each driver permitted to drive vehicles for hire and each business licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier, together with other requirements of this article, and shall maintain a log of all complaints for each operator and licensee. If the business license office shall receive any article violation complaints concerning a particular operator, or three violation complaints concerning a licensee, the business license office shall notify the operator and licensee of the complaints if the business license supervisor sets a hearing on such complaints or suspends the operator's permit or business license. The operator or licensee will have the right to show cause that he is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this article. 
(c)  A hearing shall be set before the license review board no later than 30 days after the supervisor has notified the licensee or permittee of a hearing or has suspended a permit or license. The operator may use witnesses or other evidence to show his compliance with the ordinances of the county. If the license review board shall determine a violation on the part of the operator or licensee of the ordinances of the county, it may suspend or revoke the operator's permit or recommend to the board of commissioners suspension or revocation of the business license. 
(d)  The business license office shall maintain a true and accurate log of each complaint showing the name of the complainant, the address of the complainant and the substance of the complaint. Such records shall be available to the operator and licensee, and shall be deemed a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-85. - Reciprocity with other counties and municipalities. 
If the board of commissioners adopts fees from time to time which provide a financial benefit to "resident" county companies and drivers, and in the event that any other state county or municipality should enact provisions which are similar in nature to those contained in this section, and provided such other county or municipality grants similar reciprocity and to the same extent to county companies and drivers operating in its jurisdiction, then as to the applicable individual operator's permit fees, vehicle permit sticker fees and business license regulatory fees approved by the board of commissioners, the fees assessed against noncounty operators and licensees shall be reduced to the amount of the fee assessed against resident county drivers and licensees in such other county or municipality, but in no event will the fee be reduced to less than the fee assessed against county drivers and licensees operating in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-86. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  The public safety department and the business license office shall enforce the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to six months, or both. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity, whether a licensee or permittee, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunctions in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of the county. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this article by any licensee shall be due cause for revocation of any county business license, after notice and hearing before the board of commissioners of the county. 
(e)  Violations of any provision of this article by any permittee shall be due cause for revocation of any permit after notice and hearing as provided in this article. 
(f)  The remedies set forth in subsections (a) through (e) of this section are cumulative to each other. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND VEHICLE PERMITS 

Sec. 66-88. - License requirements generally. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire, except limousines, in the unincorporated areas of the county without first having been issued a business license. Limousine carriers and other vehicles not regulated by this article but engaged in the business of vehicles for hire which are domiciled within the unincorporated areas of the county must be issued a business license and pay business license fees. All licenses shall be issued by the county business license office. 
(b)  The license must be posted in public view at the license location. 
(c)  In order to secure a business license to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier, an applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the business license office of the county, information requested by the public safety department and must submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a twenty percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  (A)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole, for criminal homicide; rape; aggravated battery; mayhem; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; child molestation; and any sex-related offense. In addition, an applicant shall not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole for any other criminal offense that could be punished as a felony under the laws of the State of Georgia or any other state or the United States, unless ten years have elapsed since the completion of any felony sentence; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. 
(B)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole, for any misdemeanor criminal offense under the laws of the State of Georgia or any state or the United States, for a period of five years prior to the date of application; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. 
(C)  If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses described in this section, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea, verdict, dismissal, or final adjudication or disposition of the charge(s). 
(4)  Provide a copy of the rate schedule and the daily hours of operation. 
(5)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual who is a fulltime employee in a management position of the applicant residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of serving of process. 
(6)  Provide proof of insurance pursuant to section 66-89. 
(7)  Provide information and verification pursuant to section 66-90. 
(8)  Provide the address of an office staffed by company agents or employees, including a dispatcher, that will be open between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and during any additional hours that any vehicle for hire associated with that company is being operated. 
(d)  All licenses obtained through the business license office of the county for taxicab companies or other entities shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2009-O-005, § 1, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2010-O-006, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 66-89. - Insurance coverage. 
(a)  An applicant for a business license to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall provide with the application proof of a single motor vehicle insurance policy which documents that all vehicles are to be used as a vehicle or vehicles for hire, covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurer authorized to do business in the state and in the applicant's name, which insurance shall have a term of at least six months in the following amounts per vehicle: 
(1)  $25,000.00 per death or bodily injury per person. 
(2)  $50,000.00 per death or bodily injury per occurrence. 
(3)  $15,000.00 personal property damage. 
Should the state law which requires motor vehicle liability minimum insurance coverage as evidence of security for bodily injury and property damage liability (O.G.G.A. § 40-9-1 et seq., the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act) be changed to require greater minimums in any category of liability listed in subsections (1) through (3) of this subsection, the minimum amounts listed in this subsection shall be automatically amended to require such amounts upon the effective date of such legislation with no additional notice to the public and no formal action required by the board of commissioners. Additionally, should there be enacted at any time laws affecting insurance requirements of vehicles for hire particularly, this article will automatically incorporate such requirements with no additional notice to the public and no formal action required by the board of commissioners. Applicant must further provide certifications from the insurer or the insurer's agent that notification of the cancellation of the insurance for a vehicle or vehicles of the applicant shall be provided to the county marshal's department that oversees the enforcement of the county's vehicle for hire ordinance. 
(b)  All persons licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be entitled to continue doing business, provided such person or entity submits to the business license office of the county proof of current insurance in the manner and amounts described above and verification pursuant to section 66-74 on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  Proof of insurance must be submitted in accordance with the term of the individual policy, but in any event at least on an annual basis. Such proof may be made in either of the following two ways: 
(1)  By providing a current insurance identification card for each vehicle intended to be operated during the period of the policy; or 
(2)  By providing a verified statement from a licensed insurance agent or licensed insurance company within this state setting forth the identity of the vehicle for which coverage has been procured (by vehicle identification number, make and model), the amount of coverage afforded to each such vehicle, indication that the vehicle is being operated as a taxicab and the term for which such coverage has been prepared by the licensed company or entity. 
(d)  Before the policy is canceled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the business license office of the county at least 30 days before the policy lapses. 
(e)  A licensee shall report any additional vehicles to be operated pursuant to this article to the business license office and shall provide proof of insurance on such vehicles pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2016-O-005, 8-2-16) 
Sec. 66-90. - Vehicle permit stickers with license. 
A business duly licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier pursuant to this article will be issued, at the time of licensing or at the time of providing proof of insurance as required by subsection 66-89(b), vehicle permitting stickers for each vehicle owned, leased or operated by such business, pursuant to the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee must: 
a.  List all vehicles to be operated in the business, indicating their make, model, year, VIN, tag number and color, on a form to be provided by the business license office. Each company shall submit a company logo and/or identification/color scheme, which shall not be the same or similar to any other company. The logo and/or identification/color scheme shall be approved by the business license office. 
b.  Execute a verification statement concerning the mechanical safety of each vehicle listed in subsection (1)a of this section pursuant to section 66-74. 
c.  Provide proof of insurance for each vehicle listed in subsection (1)a of this section as set forth in section 66-89, along with vehicle registration, both of which must be in the applicant's name. 
(2)  Stickers must at all times be displayed on the passenger's rear side window and in the front windshield, bottom righthand corner for sedan carriers. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker and that sticker may not be used on any other vehicle. 
(3)  No vehicle permit sticker issued under this article may be leased, subleased, assigned or otherwise transferred. No vehicle to which a permit sticker is affixed may be leased, subleased or otherwise assigned for the purpose of operating a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier under this article. 
(4)  A licensee shall report any additional vehicles to be operated pursuant to this article and shall provide all information necessary and pay all fees required to obtain additional vehicle permit stickers. 
(5)  A fee schedule for vehicle permit stickers will be recommended by the supervisor of the business license office and approved from time to time by the board of commissioners. Such schedule will be on file with the clerk of the county, the business license office and the department of public safety. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to renew vehicle permit stickers annually. Any licensee who fails to timely renew its vehicle permit and pay such fee when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the permit sticker fee for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date. To be considered a county business for purposes of determining vehicle sticker permit fees, a business must have or operate out of one or more offices in the unincorporated part of the county. A post office box will not constitute an office. 
(6)  If a business license is suspended for any length of time, all vehicle permit stickers associated with such license shall be null and void for the period of the suspension only. If the suspension is in effect on the annual renewal date of the business license or on the annual renewal date of the vehicle permit sticker, then immediately upon the suspension ending, such person or entity shall renew its license and vehicle permit stickers. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-91. - Denial, suspension and revocation of business license; hearing. 
(a)  A business license or an application for a business license under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. A business license shall be granted by the marshal if the application meets all the legal requirements of this article and the public safety department provides a clearance consistent with the requirements of this article. If the application does not meet all the legal requirements of this article or the public safety department does not provide a clearance on the application, it shall not be granted by the marshal. Any decision of the marshal shall be final unless an appeal is filed with the marshal, in writing, by any aggrieved party within ten days from the date of notice to the applicant regarding the denial of the application. The appeal shall be to the board of commissioners, as provided. 
(b)  Upon summary consideration of facts that indicate due cause under subsection (d) of this section, the marshal may suspend a license under this article. The suspension shall be reported in writing to the board of commissioners and the board of commissioners will review such action at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. A notice shall be sent to the licensee at the business address listed on the license, setting forth the time, place and purpose of the meeting. After a hearing, if the board of commissioners determines due cause to exist, the board may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the license or licensee. 
(c)  A business license previously issued by this county may be revoked only after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon a prior written notice to the licensee sent to the business address listed on the license, setting forth the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason why the license would be revoked. Unless the circumstances justify otherwise, three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances justify. The hearing shall be held no later than 30 days after the marshal notifies licensee of a hearing before the board of commissioners. After a hearing, if the board of commissioners determines due cause to exist, the board may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the license or licensee. 
(d)  A business license may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a business license. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this article by the licensee, its agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(6)  Allowing taxicabs to operate in the unincorporated area of the county that do not meet the requirements and standards adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  Three violation complaints received pursuant to section 66-84 and determined to be valid by the license review board. 
(e)  Licensees under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators, whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. NO. 2010-O-006, § 3, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 66-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER PERMITS 

Sec. 66-93. - Regulation of drivers of vehicles for hire. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab or sedan without an operator's permit issued by the public safety department. No business licensed to operate a taxicab service or as a sedan carrier shall employ any driver who has not been issued an operator's permit. 
(b)  Operator's permits shall not be issued to any driver not employed by or representing a licensed company. Proof of employment or representation shall be presented upon application of a permit. 
(c)  An applicant for a permit must furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the public safety department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and/or fingerprinting. Operator permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; provided, however, any driver between the age of 18 and 21 who was operating a taxicab on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be subject to this age provision. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current, valid Georgia state driver's license, which must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole, for criminal homicide; rape; aggravated battery; mayhem; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; child molestation; and any sex-related offense. In addition, an applicant shall not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole for any other criminal offense that could be punished as a felony under the laws of the State of Georgia or any other state or the United States, unless ten years have elapsed since the completion of any felony sentence. An applicant shall not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, or been on probation or parole, for any misdemeanor criminal offense under the laws of the State of Georgia or any state or the United States, for a period of five years prior to the date of application; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. 
(d)  All operator permits automatically expire two years from the date they are issued. It shall be the responsibility of the operator to renew his permit and pay the applicable fee. 
(e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or status from information previously supplied to the public safety department within ten days of such change. 
(f)  Operator permits must be posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Drivers of sedans must have their operator's permits in their possession and they must be visible to passengers. Licensees under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current operator's permit in his possession and that such permit is posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated. 
(g)  A schedule of permit fees, as adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be posted in the offices of the clerk of the county and the public safety department. Any permittee who fails to timely renew his permit and fails to pay such fee when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date. If the fees adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners provide for different fees for county drivers/operators than for noncounty drivers/operators, to be considered a county driver/operator and pay fees associated therewith, a driver must have or operate out of one or more offices in the unincorporated part of the county; a post office box will not constitute an office. Proof of a current lease, if applicable, for the company premises, an affidavit as to ownership or occupancy or proof of association with a county licensee must be submitted to the public safety department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2010-O-006, § 4, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 66-94. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permits; hearing. 
(a)  An operator's permit or an application for an operator's permit under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. An operator's permit shall be granted by the director of public safety or his designee if the application meets all the legal requirements of this article and the public safety department provides a clearance consistent with the provisions of this article. If the application does not meet all the legal requirements of this article or the public safety department does not provide a clearance on the application, it shall not be granted by the director of public safety or his designee. Any decision of the director or his designee shall be final unless an appeal is filed by any aggrieved party within ten days from the date of notice to the applicant regarding denial of the application. The appeal shall be to the license review board. 
(b)  The director of public safety or his designee may suspend or revoke an operator's permit for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section. The suspension or revocation shall be reported in writing to the license review board, and the license review board will review such action at the next regularly scheduled meeting. A notice shall be sent to the permittee setting forth the time, place and purpose of the meeting. After a hearing, the license review board may affirm the decision of the director to suspend or revoke the permit, or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without the conditions, the permit or operator. If the decision of the director is disaffirmed, the permit shall be returned to the permittee immediately. 
(c)  The decision of the license review board shall be final unless appealed or unless the board of commissioners agree to hear such appeal. 
(d)  An operator's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(2)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. 
(3)  Failure to pay any fees imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Failure to maintain all the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a driver's permit. 
(5)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period. 
(6)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin or religious belief. 
(7)  Operating a vehicle with knowledge, actual or implied, that the required insurance coverage is not current or has lapsed. 
(8)  Operating a vehicle in a manner that threatens a passenger or anyone else. 
(9)  Operating a vehicle the driver knows or should know is not in compliance with the motor vehicle safety standards approved by the board of commissioners. 
(10)  The permit applicant, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing of his application, has suffered a revocation of his operator's permit. 
(11)  A complaint is received pursuant to section 66-84 and determined to be valid by the license review board. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions in this section, any permits issued through administrative error or an error in the completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the director of public safety or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 66-95. - Compliance. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all applications for renewal of business licenses and driver's permits. 
(Ord. No. 2001-018, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2009-O-005, § 2, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2010-O-006, § 5, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 70 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of the 1992 zoning ordinance, as amended, are contained in a separate publication, on file and available for inspection in the offices of the county. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 