Chapter 7 - AVIATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-48, §§ 1—4, enacted July 25, 2017, repealed Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-14, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-4, pertaining to the same subject matter. Former Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-14, was derived from Ord. No. 75-16, § 1, 3-4-75; Ord. No. 83-33, § 2, 5-24-83; Ord. No. 84-69, § 1, 7-17-84. 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
Unless from the context a different meaning is apparent as used in these regulations, the terms hereinafter used shall be defined as follows: 
Airport shall mean the Columbus Airport. 
Airport director shall mean the officer or representative of the commission having immediate charge of the airport. 
Airport Operations Area (AOA) shall mean any area used for the parking, landing, takeoff or surface maneuvering of aircraft. The AOA is considered a restricted area and is off-limits to the general public. 
Commission shall mean the Columbus Airport Commission. 
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, association or corporation. 
Security Identification Display Area (SIDA) shall mean the area on the airport where employees and all other unescorted persons are required to display identification approved by the airport at all times. Prerequisites for this area are listed in 14 CFR Part 1542. 
(Ord. No. 17-48, § 1, 7-25-2017) 
Sec. 7-2. - Commercial enterprises. 
(a)  The commission has the right to regulate all commercial enterprises using the airport, whether such operation is aeronautical or nonaeronautical in nature. No commercial operation of any kind or type shall be conducted on the airport unless specifically authorized by the commission. 
(b)  A violation of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-48, § 2, 7-25-2017) 
Sec. 7-3. - Privilege of using the airport. 
(a)  The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user to obey all rules and regulations adopted by the commission. 
(b)  The commission has the power to regulate the conduct of persons on the airport and shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the operation of the airport and the protection of the traveling public. Such rules and regulations may be enforced by the airport director or his designee. 
(c)  The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and he shall release and hold harmless and indemnify the commission, its officers and employees from any liability of loss resulting from such use, as well as claims from third persons using the airport. 
(d)  The privilege of using the airport shall be upon the further condition that any person, persons, corporations, copartnership, or others desiring to use the same, shall furnish a policy of indemnity against personal injury and property damage in such sum as the commission shall require. 
(Ord. No. 17-48, § 3, 7-25-2017) 
Sec. 7-4. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall disregard or violate any posted signs, fences, or barricades prohibiting entry upon restricted areas or governing the activity of the public while on airport property. 
(2)  No person shall commit any disorderly, obscene, or indecent act, or commit any nuisance on airport property. 
(3)  No unauthorized person shall enter any transformer vault or storage room not leased or used in common with the general public, except in cases of emergency. 
(4)  No unauthorized person shall enter the airport's AOA or SIDA unless escorted by a person granted escort privileges by the commission. 
(5)  No person shall deposit garbage, papers, refuse, or other forms of trash or waste except in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(6)  No person may walk in a picket line as a picket or take part in any labor or other demonstration or any part of the airport, except in or at the place specifically designated by the commission for such picketing or other permitted demonstration. 
(7)  No person shall operate or release any model aircraft, balloon, kite, rocket, drone or other similar contrivance at or upon airport property without the prior written approval of the commission. 
(8)  No person shall enter any public buildings on airport property with an unrestrained dog or other animal except for certified assistance animals without the prior written approval of the commission. Dogs or other animals, other than certified assistance animals, shall be restrained in a pet carrier or held by the owner, restrained by a leash or confined in such manner as to be under control at all times. 
(9)  No person, except as allowed by law shall possess any firearm, knife, club, weapon, explosives or inflammable materials on airport property. Firearms properly packed and prepared for shipment on an aircraft are specifically exempted. 
(10)  No vehicle shall be operated on the runway or taxiway of the airport without the prior written approval of the commission and then only with approval of personnel in the control tower. 
(11)  No person shall exceed posted speed limits at the airport. Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit at the airport is 25 miles per hour except on the parking aprons, for which the maximum speed limit is 15 miles per hour. 
(12)  Motor vehicle operators shall give the right-of-way to all aircraft moving under power or emergency response vehicles. 
(13)  No commercial vehicle may operate on the airport without a commission issued permit. 
(b)  In addition to and not in lieu of any restrictions on use of this airport promulgated by the commission, violations of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-48, § 4, 7-25-2017) 
Chapter 7A - BAZAAR MARKETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-114, adopted Oct. 24, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as a new Ch. 7A was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Flea markets, Ch. 11B; taxation and licenses, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7A-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Bazaar Market Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 101, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city by regulating the location, design and maintenance of bazaar markets. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 102, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-3. - Function. 
This chapter establishes minimum standards for bazaar markets. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 103, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. Unless the context of this chapter requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and administration of the chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. 
(b)  Specific definitions. 
Accessory structure. Any structural addition which includes awnings, cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets, and similar appurtenant structures. 
Bazaar market. An activity consisting of rows of shops or flea market stands selling miscellaneous goods, within an enclosed building. 
Bazaar market stand. That part of the enclosed building which has been partitioned, reserved or designated for the placement of bazaar market stores, booths, appurtenant structures or additions. The use of such stands shall require the occupant or owner to obtain a certificate of occupancy and a business license from the city. Such use shall be subject to all the rules and regulations effecting the collection and payment of gross receipt tax. 
Building. A roofed structure erected for permanent use. 
Building inspector. Shall mean the chief of the inspections and code enforcement division of the city. 
Booth. A structure constructed for the purpose of displaying and selling merchandise. 
Common area. Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying bazaar markets. 
Enforcing agency. The chief of the inspections and code enforcement division of the city charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Governing body. The Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Long-termed tenant. A vendor who occupies a designated space within a bazaar market for more than seven successive days. 
Lot line. A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan. 
Market management. The person who owns or has charge, care or control of the bazaar market. 
Permit. A written document issued by the inspections and code enforcement division allowing a person to locate a bazaar market or to construct, alter or extend a bazaar market under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity. 
Public street. A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Rights-of-way. The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists. 
Short-termed tenants. A vendor who occupies a designated space within a bazaar market for no more than seven successive days. 
Sewer connection. Pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the bazaar market stand and the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewer system serving the bazaar market. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 202, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-5. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 601, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-6. - Conflict of provisions; effect of partial invalidity. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the municipality, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 602, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-7. - Variances. 
Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship, the planning division may authorize a variance, if such variance can be made without destroying the intent of these regulations. In granting variances, the planning division may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards of requirements so varied. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 604, 10-24-89) 
Secs. 7A-8—7A-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 8; fire protection, ch. 11; zoning, ch. 22. 

Sec. 7A-21. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a bazaar market or to construct, alter or extend any bazaar market within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the inspections and code enforcement division. Construction must begin within 180 days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 301, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-22. - Applications. 
All applications for permits for bazaar markets shall be submitted to the inspections and code enforcement division after submission and approval of the final site plan by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 302, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-23. - Bazaar market site plan layout. 
(a)  A bazaar market site plan layout shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch and shall show the following information: 
(1)  Five black or blue line prints of the final site plan or before the first working day of the month shall be submitted to the planning division and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors. 
b.  Name and address of owner of land. 
c.  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the bazaar market. 
d.  Scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
e.  North arrow. 
f.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
g.  The number, location and size of all bazaar market stands. 
h.  The location, width and area of roadways, parkways, streets, driveways and walks. 
i.  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
j.  Location and design of parking spaces. 
k.  Gross density. 
(2)  Review and comment of the bazaar market site plan layout shall be noted in a report of the planning division and on all five prints as submitted. 
(3)  Approval of the final site plan shall be noted on all five prints and attested to by the signature of the chief of the planning division. Three prints shall be returned to the applicant, and two prints retained in the files of the planning division. 
(b)  Before acting on the bazaar market site plan layout, the planning division may request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the proposed development, such as the district highway engineer, and public utilities. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the requirement of this chapter, and include comments on other factors which bear upon the public interest. The responsibility of securing the reports is that of the planning division staff. 
(c)  Any time after approval of the final site plan by the planning division, application may be made to the inspections and code enforcement division for a permit for the construction of the bazaar market. Five complete sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the inspections and code enforcement division with one set to be returned to the planning division upon issuance of a permit containing the following: 
(1)  The approved final site plan. 
(2)  Plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed, altered or extended within the bazaar market. 
(3)  The location and details of lighting and electrical systems. 
(d)  Upon review of the application, and subject to evidence that the bazaar market meets the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Health by the department of public health of the city inspections and code enforcement division shall issue a permit when a review of the application and inspection of the site demonstrates that the proposed or existing bazaar market meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  The procedure for obtaining site plan layout approval of a bazaar market is as follows: 
(1)  All plats submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the first working day of the month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the fifteenth day of the same month. 
(2)  All bazaar market site plan layouts submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the fifteenth day of each month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 1st working day of the following month. 
Please note: When a first or fifteenth day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, preliminary site plans may be submitted on the following work day. 
a.  At least five black or blue line prints of the site plan layout prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations shall be submitted. 
b.  Review, comment and/or approval of the site plan shall be made by the chief of the planning division, the review, comment and/or approval shall be noted on all copies of the site plan as submitted. Four prints shall be returned to the applicant and one print retained by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 303, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Site plan, tree protection, § 20A-8. 
Sec. 7A-24. - Inspections. 
(a)  The inspections and code enforcement division is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The inspections and code enforcement division shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The inspections and code enforcement division may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of public health relating to any of the rules and regulations of state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of public health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the inspections and code enforcement division. 
(d)  The health officer's representative shall notify the inspections and code enforcement division of such violations and requirements for corrections. 
(e)  All persons operating a bazaar or a flea market stand under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the visitation, inspection and investigation of the police of the city at any time. Refusal of the dealer or persons in charge of the place of business shall be immediately closed on the order of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 304, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-25. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit for a bazaar market may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  Should the inspections and code enforcement division find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter [the inspection and code enforcement division] shall give notice to the permittee or owner that, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within 30 days, the permit will be revoked. 
(2)  If, at the end of 30 days, a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, the inspections and code enforcement division shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension in writing to the permittee or owner. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee or owner shall cease operation and/or construction of the bazaar market. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 305, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-26. - Uses specifically prohibited. 
(a)  The sale of guns and knives, except for domestic knives such as kitchen cutlery, shall not be permitted on or within the premises of the bazaar market. 
(b)  No truckload sales of any type will be allowed outside or within the premises of the bazaar market area. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 306, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 90-24, 3-20-90) 
Sec. 7A-27. - Permitted zones. 
Bazaar markets shall only be allowed in C-1 (central commercial district) and C-3 (general commercial district). 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 307, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-28. - Appeals. 
(a)  Petition. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter relating to bazaar markets, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of zoning appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the inspections and code enforcement division a written statement of the grounds of such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension except in the case of an order issued under section 7A-25. Upon receipt of such request, the board of zoning appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
(b)  Hearing. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  Order of board of zoning appeals. After such hearing the board of zoning appeals shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the bazaar market affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 308, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-29. - Emergencies. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of the inspections and code enforcement division finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health including violations of any of the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public health or state department of public health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existing of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of zoning appeals, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. 
(b)  The provisions of section 7A-28 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 309, 10-24-89) 
Secs. 7A-30—7A-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 7A-41. - Site improvement requirements for new buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(b)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every bazaar market shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and/or mud. 
(c)  Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every bazaar market shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. 
(d)  Setbacks, bufferstrips and screening. 
(1)  All bazaar markets shall conform to the setback requirements as established by the commercial zone at which the market is to be located. 
(2)  All bazaar markets adjacent to residential uses shall be provided with screening of a well-maintained opaque fence(s) along the boundary line separating the market and adjacent zoning and uses. The screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(e)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all bazaar markets. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross sales area. This provision shall not be applicable to C-1 districts. 
(f)  Identification. Each booth shall be numbered. Each number shall be easily identified from the nearest aisle or main entrance. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 401, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 22. 
Sec. 7A-42. - Water supply requirements. 
(a)  Generally. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each bazaar market. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the state department of public health in accordance with rules and regulations for water supply quality control. 
(b)  Distribution system. The water supply system of the bazaar market shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
Cross reference— Water, § 13-551 et seq. 
Sec. 7A-43. - Restroom and sewage disposal. 
(a)  There shall be a minimum of one central restroom facility located on the premises. Within that central restroom there shall be separate facilities for men and women. 
(b)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory and sink; cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(c)  Restrooms shall contain the minimum of fixtures as required by the Standard Plumbing Code. 
(d)  An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all bazaar markets for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system and connection shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of the city, and the approval of the state department of public health and state water quality control board. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 403, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Sewers, § 13-173 et seq. 
Sec. 7A-44. - Electrical distribution system. 
Every bazaar market shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances for each bazaar market stand, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable electric codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 404, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 7A-45. - Structural requirements. 
All structures to include booths shall comply with the building code of the city. All materials used shall be grade marked lumber, as specified by Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 405, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 8. 
Sec. 7A-46. - Refuse handling. 
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the bazaar markets shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 406, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Solid waste collection and disposal, § 13-167 et seq. 
Sec. 7A-47. - Insect and rodent control. 
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 407, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Prevention and control of mosquitoes and rodents, § 13-112. 
Sec. 7A-48. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Bazaar markets shall be subject to fire prevention ordinances adopted by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Bazaar markets shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(c)  Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention bureau shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire protection bureau and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 408, 10-24-89) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 11. 
Secs. 7A-49—7A-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION 

Sec. 7A-61. - Responsibilities of bazaar market management. 
(a)  The person to whom a permit for a bazaar market is issued shall operate a bazaar market in compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the market, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The bazaar market management shall notify market tenants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
(c)  The bazaar market management shall supervise the placement of each bazaar market booth on its stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  The bazaar market management shall notify the department of public health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the bazaar market. 
(Ord. No. 89-114, § 501, 10-24-89) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Location restrictions on adult-oriented establishments, § 14-96; numbering of buildings, § 18-53. 
State Law reference— State taxation on plumbing contractors, Ga. Code, § 92-903. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-19, § 1, adopted March 4, 1980, repealed Art. I in its entirety. Said article contained provisions numbered §§ 8-1—8-5 and 8-5.1—8-5.3, which pertained to the plumber examining board and were derived from Ord. No. 69-20, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 1969 and Ord. No. 75-109, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Oct. 28, 1975. 

Secs. 8-1—8-5.3. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-19, § 2, adopted March 4, 1980, repealed Art. II in its entirety. Said article contained provisions numbered §§ 8-6—8-12 which pertained to the electrical review and appeals board and were derived from Ord. No. 77-12, adopted Jan. 25, 1977. 

Secs. 8-6—8-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IIA. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed Art. IIA, which pertained to Building Contractors' Examining Board and derived from Ord. No. 59-103, §§ 1—14, 12-28-59; Ord. No. 69-231, § 1, 11-24-69; Ord. No. 75-24, § 1, 3-25-75; Ord. No. 87-87, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 98-20, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 98-21, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 98-57, 6-16-98. 

Secs. 8-12.1—8.12.14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, adopted May 9, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 8-13—8-14.1, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 95-85, §§ 1—12, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 98-51, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-46, § 1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 11-34, § 2, 6-28-11. 

Sec. 8-13. - Title and definitions. 
(a)  Uniform Codes Act. Building permits shall be issued in conformance with the technical codes adopted and amended by Columbus under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act. 
(b)  The provisions embraced within this article along with the latest available edition of the International Building Code, as amended and adopted by the State of Georgia, published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of council, are hereby adopted as "The Building Code of Columbus, Georgia," for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height area, and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in Columbus, Georgia; providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; providing penalties for violations of such code; and, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(c)  Detached one-and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the latest available edition of the International Residential Code, as amended and adopted by the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Pursuant to Ga. L. 1996, p.1632, § 3, Columbus, Georgia, is hereby exempted from the provisions of said Act codified as O.C.G.A. Section 8-2-26(d). 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress, facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems, and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
(b)  The scope of this code shall include and apply to all new electrical installations, alterations, additions, repairs and maintenance to all electrical wiring, electrical construction, apparatus, fixtures, equipment or appurtenances thereto for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy for light, heat or power, including appliances, signs and elevators, within or on public and private buildings or structures, including the premises or yards, tents, carnivals, parking lots or similar use of premises, within the jurisdiction of Columbus, Georgia. 
(d)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(e)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by any jurisdiction, under the requirements of this code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan, or their adequacy. No jurisdiction nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirements and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Technical codes. Any reference hereinafter to "technical codes" throughout this chapter of the Columbus Code includes to the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Energy Conservation Code, Minimum Fire Safety Standards, International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, and National Electrical Code, as may be adopted and updated by the state. 
(c)  Building. The provisions of the technical codes, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or appurtenance connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(d)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(e)  Appendices. To be enforceable, the appendices included in this code must be referenced in the code text or specifically included in the adopting ordinance. 
(f)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in this code shall be considered an integral part of the codes without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(g)  Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.2. - Building department. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby recognized a department of inspections and code, the department head thereof being known as the chief of inspections and code, hereinafter referred to as the building official. 
(b)  Employee qualifications. 
(1)  Building official qualifications. The building official shall have at least ten years' experience or equivalent, as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor, or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. The building official should be certified as a building official through a recognized certification program. 
(2)  Deputy building official qualifications. The building official may designate the assistant director of the department of inspections and code as the deputy building official who shall assist the building official in administering the provisions of the Building Code and during the absence or disability of the building official, exercise all the powers of the building official. Such deputy building official shall have at least ten years' experience or equivalent, as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor, or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of the work. The deputy building official should be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade. 
(3)  Inspector qualifications. The building official may appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees, as shall be authorized from time to time. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector of construction who has not had at least five years experience as a building inspector, engineer, architect, or as a superintendent, foreman, or competent mechanic in charge of construction. The inspector should be certified, through a recognized certification program, for the appropriate trade. 
(c)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interest of the department. 
(d)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permit and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required by the legally applicable records retention schedule. 
(e)  Liability. Any officer or employee, charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the applicable governing authority, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(f)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.3. - Power and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to this agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures, or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the procedures for requiring the abatement of unsafe buildings, as outlined in articles V and VI of this chapter. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(i)  Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of inspections and code. 
(j)  Flood hazard areas. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provision required in flood hazard areas. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.4. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(2)  Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
a.  Building: 
1.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
2.  Temporary motion picture, television, and theatre stage sets and scenery. 
3.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
4.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
5.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
b.  Electrical: 
1.  Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting. Temporary electric power and lighting installations shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
2.  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor. 
3.  Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
4.  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
5.  Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
c.  Gas: 
1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
d.  Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliances. 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling units. 
4.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
5.  Portable evaporative coolers. 
6.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
7.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
e.  Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
f.  Repairs: 
1.  Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. Such minor repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or loadbearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. The building official or his designee shall be available to determine whether a proposed repair is exempt. 
2.  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs that otherwise require a permit, must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
(3)  Temporary structures. The erection of temporary structures such as construction sheds, seats, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands shall not require a permit as long as such structures shall be completely removed in a timely fashion. 
(4)  Work authorized. A building permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(5)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, of any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for the permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications, and accompanying date shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer, shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer, legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice or architecture or engineering, and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies, with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a foundation only permit. The applicant may proceed at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of the Department of Engineering identifying the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in this code. 
(e)  Contractor's responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. 
(1)  Electrician's license. 
a.  No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the electrical construction, installation or repair business, within the corporate limits of the City of Columbus, without obtaining a business license as required by the ordinances of the City of Columbus. 
b.  No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor unless such person holds a valid license issued by the State Construction Industry Board, Division of Electrical Contractors. No partnership or corporation shall have the right to engage in the business of electrical contractor unless there is regularly connected with such partnership or corporation a person or persons actually engaged in the performance of such business on a fulltime basis who have valid licenses issued by the State Construction Industry Board, Division of Electrical Contractors. 
c.  Any person, partnership or corporation making application for a license to engage in the business of electrical contracting in Columbus, Georgia, shall furnish the Revenue Collections Division of Columbus, Georgia, a copy of the license issued by the division of electrical contractors. 
d.  No person shall engage in alarm system, general system, or telecommunication system, low-voltage contracting unless such person has a valid license issued by the state construction industry licensing board, division of low-voltage contracting. No partnership or corporation shall have the right to engage in the business of low-voltage contracting unless there is regularly connected with such partnership or corporation a person or persons, actually engaged in the performance of such business on a fulltime basis and supervising the low-voltage systems installation, repair, alteration, and service work of all employees of such partnership or corporation, who have valid licenses issued by the state construction industry licensing board, division of low-voltage contracting. 
e.  Any person, partnership or corporation, making application for a license to engage in the business of low-voltage contracting in the city shall furnish the revenue collections division of the city a copy of the license issued by the division of low-voltage contracting of the state construction industry licensing board. 
(2)  Plumber license. No person shall engage in the business of plumbing contractor unless such person holds a valid license for master plumber issued by the state construction industry board, division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. No partnership or corporation shall have the right to engage in the business of plumbing unless there is regularly connected with such partnership or corporation a person or persons actually engaged in the performance of such business on a full-time basis who hold a valid license for master plumber issued by the state construction industry board, division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. Any person, partnership or corporation making application for a license to engage in the business of plumbing in Columbus, Georgia, shall furnish the revenue collections division of Columbus, Georgia, a copy of the license issued by the division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. 
(3)  Mechanical license. No person shall engage in the business of conditioned air contractor unless such person holds a valid license for conditioned air contractor issued by the state construction industry board, division of conditioned air contractors. No partnership or corporation shall have the right to engage in the business of conditioned air contractor unless there is regularly connected with such partnership or corporation a person or persons actually engaged in the performance of such business on a full-time basis who hold a valid license for conditioned air contractor issued by the state construction industry board, division of conditioned air contractors.. Any person, partnership or corporation making application for a license to engage in the business of conditioned air contractor in Columbus, Georgia, shall furnish the revenue collections division of Columbus, Georgia, a copy of the license issued by the division of conditioned air contractors. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, but then is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permit drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed herein have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Fee schedule. 
a.  Building. For all buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a building permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time such permit is issued, in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  The construction valuation of one or two family residential structures shall be calculated, per every square foot of floor area, based on a value equal to 57 percent of the current International Code Council building valuation data. 
2.  The construction valuation of all other structures shall be calculated based on the current "Square Foot Construction Costs" per the International Code Council Valuation Data. 
3.  Where the construction valuation does not exceed $26,000.00 the permit fee shall be $75.00. 
4.  For construction valuations over $26,000.00, up to and including $30,000.00, the permit fee shall be $75.00 for the first $26,000.00, plus, for each additional thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, add $2.50. 
5.  For construction valuations over $30,000, the permit fee shall be $85.00 for the first $30,000 plus, for each additional thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, add $4.00. 
6.  A plan review fee, for commercial construction shall be one-fourth the permit fee to be submitted with permit application, $75.00 minimum. Plan review fee is a separate fee from the permit fee and shall not be deducted from the permit fee. 
7.  For the moving of any building or structure, other than a portable building, the fee shall be $75.00. 
8.  For the moving of any portable building the fee shall be $50.00. 
9.  For the demolition of any residential building or structure, the fee shall be $50.00 
10.  For the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the fee shall be $40.00. 
11.  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a reinspection shall be as follows: 
i.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
ii.  For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
12.  Where any building permit has been expired less than 24 months, the reactivation fee shall be $75.00 
13.  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter. 
b.  Gas. For all gas systems requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time such permit is issued, in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For the installation, repair, alteration or addition of gas piping, appliances or appurtenances, the fee shall be $50.00 per meter. 
2.  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a reinspection shall be as follows: 
i.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
ii.  . For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
3.  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter. 
c.  Electrical. For all electrical systems requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time such permit is issued, in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For the installation, repair, alteration or addition of electrical work the fee shall be $50.00 per meter. 
2.  For temporary electrical service, the fee shall be $50.00 per meter. 
3.  For construction power permits the fee shall be $50.00 per meter. 
4.  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a re-inspection shall be as follows: 
i.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
ii.  For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
5.  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter. 
6.  Construction power approval shall be issued for a period of no more than 180 days. If necessary for temporary work to remain for more than 180 days, request for such extension of temporary approval shall be made in writing by the person, firm or corporation holding the permit. 
d.  Plumbing. For all plumbing work requiring a permit a fee shall be paid as required at the time such permit is issued, in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For the installation, repair, alteration or addition to any plumbing system, fixture, or appliance the fee shall be $50.00 per meter. 
2.  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a re-inspection shall be as follows: 
i.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
ii.  For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
3.  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter. 
e.  Mechanical. For all heating and air conditioning work requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time such permit is issued, in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For the installation, repair, alteration or addition of heating, ventilating, duct, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, the fee shall be $50.00. 
2.  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a re-inspection shall be as follows: 
i.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
ii.  For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
3.  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter 
f.  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17; Ord. No. 18-24, § 1, 6-12-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Sec. 8-14.5. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with this code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to insure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(3)  Electrical. 
a.  The building official, or his duly authorized representative, shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all electrical work or installations for which an electrical permit is required, and upon completion of all work or installation, notice shall be given the building inspection department and a final inspection made. 
b.  Before any electrical work or installation is concealed, the building official, or his duly authorized representative, shall be notified. It shall then be his duty to inspect such work or installations, and, providing all the requirements of this code have been complied with, issue an approval to conceal the work or installation. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm or corporation, their agents or employees, to cover or conceal any electrical installation before such inspection has been made. 
c.  The utility company shall not provide electrical service to any installations until the work to which service is to be provided has been approved by the building inspection department and the utility company so notified. 
(4)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, and all soil waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. NOTE: See the applicable section of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(5)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(g)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(h)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official or his designee has been received. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.6. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building other than a one or two family residence that is not a home occupation shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building, business license name or description change until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. An existing building other than a one or two family residence that is not a home occupation shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building, business license name or description change until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Business license. No business license shall be issued for any occupancy or change of occupancy for a building or part of a building until after the building official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the testing of building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the disconnection of the utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system, shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(d)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupancy of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on the plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.7. - Tests. 
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required by the legally applicable records retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.8. - Appeals. 
Whenever the building official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed, or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this code, or any of the regulations thereunder, have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the building official to the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.9. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-14.10. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of any requirements set forth in this article or any permits or plans submitted or issued in accordance with this article, or shall fail to obtain a certificate of occupancy or otherwise comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 2, 5-9-17) 
ARTICLE IIIA. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 3, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed Art. IIIA, which pertained to Gas Code and derived from Ord. No. 95-86, §§ 1—12, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 98-53, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-48, § 1, 6-20-06. 

Secs. 8-15—8-16.10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IIIB. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 4, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed Art. IIIB, which pertained to Electrical Code and derived from Ord. No. 69-108, §§ 1—11, 6-30-69; Ord. No. 71-310, 12-14-71; Ord. No. 72-172, § 1, 9-5-72; Ord. No. 75-110, § 1, 10-28-75; Ord. No. 79-116, § 1, 10-16-79; Ord. No. 81-84, § 1, 8-18-81; Ord. No. 84-111, 11-20-84; Ord. No. 84-113, 11-20-84; Ord. No. 85-7, § 2, 1-15-85; Ord. No. 86-135, § 1, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 87-85, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 91-51, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 91-63, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 91-91, § 1, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 94-79, § 1, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-55, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-47, § 1, 6-20-06. 

Secs. 8-17—8-18.10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IIIC. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 5, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed Art. IIIC, which pertained to Plumbing Code and derived from Ord. No. 95-87, §§ 1—12, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 96-68, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 98-54, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-50, § 1, 6-20-06. 

Secs. 8-18.11—8-18.20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IIID. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 6, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed Art. IIID, which pertained to Mechanical Code and derived from Ord. No. 95-87, §§ 1—12, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 96-68, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 98-54, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-50, § 1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 98-52, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-20-06. 

Secs. 8-18.21—8-18.22.10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOL CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 8-19—8-27, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-89, §§ 1—9, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 98-56, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 06-52, § 1, 6-20-06. 

Sec. 8-19. - Title. 
The provisions embraced within this Article along with the latest available Edition of the International Swimming Pool And Spa Code, as amended and adopted by the State of Georgia, published by International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of Council, are hereby adopted as "The Swimming Pool Code of Columbus, Georgia," for the purpose of prescribing minimum standards for the construction of swimming pools; hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-20. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code apply to the protection of public health, safety, and welfare by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction or installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto; requiring a permit and inspection therefor; providing the administration and enforcement of the standards set forth herein. 
(b)  The provisions of this code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of this act or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-21. - Organization. 
(a)  Code official. Whenever the term, "code official," is used in this code, it shall be construed to be the director of the department of inspections and code, hereinafter also referred to as the building official. 
(b)  Duties of the code official. The code official shall maintain public office hours necessary to efficiently administer the provisions of this code and amendments thereto and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Require submission of, examine and check plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions, or diagrams where necessary to show clearly the character, kind and extent of swimming pool work covered by applications for a permit and, upon approval thereof, shall issue the permit applied therefor. 
(2)  Collect all fees for permits issued as provided by this code. 
(3)  Enforce the provisions of this code and inspect all swimming pool work authorized by permit to assure compliance with provisions of this code or amendments thereto. 
(4)  Reject all work done or materials used or being used which do not comply with the provisions of this code and amendments thereto. 
(5)  Order changes in workmanship or materials or both essential to obtain compliance with all provisions of this code. 
(6)  Investigate any construction or work regulated by this code and issue such notices and orders as provided in this code. 
(7)  Transfer all fees collected by him to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-22. - Right of entry. 
The code official shall have the right of entry, during business hours, to inspect any and all swimming pools, or portion thereof, in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-23. - Dangerous construction. 
(a)  Issuance of order. Whenever, upon investigation, any construction or work regulated by this code is deemed hazardous, dangerous, unsafe, or a menace to life, health, or property or otherwise in violation of this code, the code official shall order any person, firm or corporation, using or maintaining such condition or responsible use or maintenance thereof to discontinue the use of or maintenance thereof or to repair, alter, or change same as may be necessary for the protection of life, health, or property. Such order shall be in writing to the owner, agent, or person responsible for the premises on which such condition exists, and shall specify a reasonable date or time when such order shall be complied with. 
(b)  Compliance with order. Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with the notice or order specified in this section shall be considered a violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-24. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No swimming pool installation, alteration, or repair work shall be commenced until a permit shall first have been obtained from the code official. 
(2)  The code official shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, without reasonable or unnecessary delay. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this code. 
(3)  Any permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized by it is not commenced within 180 days after it's issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced; provided that, for cause, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 60 days each, may be allowed in writing by the building official. 
(4)  No person shall permit any other person to do or cause or permit to be done any swimming pool work under any permit secured by such persons, except as permitted by state law. 
(b)  Authority to stop work. Whenever any construction regulated by this code is being, or has been done, contrary to the requirements of this code, the code official may order all work stopped on that portion of the installation of which such violation has occurred. Every such order shall be in writing, stating the nature of the violation and fixing a time limit for compliance. No person shall do any work on any portion of the equipment regulated by this code after a stop order has been issued, except in conformance with directions of the code official. 
(c)  Application for permit. 
(1)  Any person who desires a permit to install, alter, or repair a swimming pool shall make application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall describe the work to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. The code official may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany every application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with this code. Such information shall be specific, and this code shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. 
(3)  Plot plans with site grades, dimensioned, and drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8 in/ft and showing at least the following: 
a.  Property lines, easements, right-of-way of record and overhead utilities adjacent to pool area or over the property. 
b.  Existing structures, fencing, retaining walls, and other relevant characteristics adjacent to pool area. 
c.  Proposed pool shape, dimensioned and located to show setbacks, side yards, and clearance from existing structures adjacent to the pool area. 
d.  Proposed mechanical equipment pad, dimensions, and location as to setbacks and side yards. 
e.  All deck equipment items, if included. 
f.  Proposed deck work configuration, showing its anticipated drainage. 
g.  Anticipated overall drainage of the pool site. 
(4)  A structural plan showing at least the following: 
a.  Type of construction, whether gunite, poured concrete, prefabricated, or other. 
b.  Pool dimensions, including the depth, and adequate cross-sections drawn to scale. 
c.  Computations, stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans; including the reinforcing steel schedule and detail. 
d.  A statement by the applicant concerning the anticipated nature of the soil under and around the pool structure. 
e.  Interior finish details. 
(5)  A mechanical plan showing at least the following: 
a.  Volume, system flow rate in gallons per minute, and turnover in hours. 
b.  Type and size of filtration systems and means of waste disposal. 
c.  Type and size of pool heater, if included, including the method of venting and provisions for combustion air. 
d.  Pool piping layout with all sizes shown and types of material to be used, and showing the location of the main outlet, surface skimmers, and inlets. 
e.  Rated capacity of the pool pump in gpm at the design head with the size and type of motor indicated and identified as self-printing or straight centrifugal. 
f.  Means of adding makeup water. 
g.  Size, length from source to heater, and routing of the gas line. 
(6)  All plans submitted shall be on substantial paper and shall show the name and address of the person under whose supervision the plans were prepared. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the code official determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions, or information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit upon payment of the required fee. Permits shall be obtained for all of the electrical, plumbing, related utility connections and heating work at the time of issuance of the building permit for the pool structure. 
(e)  Cost of permit. 
(1)  Every applicant for a permit to install, alter, or repair a swimming pool system, or part thereof, shall state in writing, on a form furnished for that purpose, the character of work proposed, together with such other information as may be required. 
(2)  Every applicant shall pay for each permit, at the time of making application, a fee in accordance with the schedule of permit fees shown herein. 
(3)  Any person who shall commence any swimming pool work, for which a permit is required by this code, without having first obtained a permit therefor, shall pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work required by the code official for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. In all cases a permit shall be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so. 
(f)  Schedule of permit fees. The permit shall be determined by the construction valuation in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  The construction valuation shall be calculated based on the current "Square Foot Construction Costs" per the International Code Council Valuation Data. 
(2)  Where the construction valuation does not exceed $26,000.00 the permit fee shall be $75.00. 
(3)  For construction valuations over $26,000.00, up to and including $30,000.00, the permit fee shall be $75.00 for the first $26,000.00, plus, for each additional thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, add $2.50. 
(4)  For construction valuations over $30,000, the permit fee shall be $85.00 for the first $30, 000 plus, for each additional thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, add $4.00. 
(5)  Where any work or installation has been disapproved, the fee for a reinspection shall be as follows: 
a.  For first occurrence there will be no charge. 
b.  For subsequent occurrences the fee shall be $50.00. 
(6)  Where any building permit has been expired less than 24 months, the reactivation fee shall be $75.00. 
(7)  Where inspections are required after hours for approved shut downs, or other emergency needs, the fee shall be $50.00, for the first hour, plus $30.00 for each additional hour thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-25. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections required. All swimming pool installations or alterations, including equipment, piping, and appliances, shall be subject to inspection by the code official to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code. 
(b)  Notification. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the code official that said work is ready for inspection. The code official shall have 48 hours in which to make such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-26. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall design, erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or repair any public or private swimming pool, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing, submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-27. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 7, 5-9-17) 
Secs. 8-28—8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 8-41—8-50.2, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to housing and derived from Ord. No. 95-90, §§ 1—6, 8—12, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 03-56, § 2, 7-8-03. 

Sec. 8-41. - Title. 
The provisions embraced within the following sections along with Chapters 2,3,4,5, and 6 of the 2012 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended and adopted by the State of Georgia, published by the International Code Council, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of Council, are hereby adopted as "The Property Maintenance Code of Columbus; Georgia," for the purpose of establishing minimum housing standards to maintain health and cleanliness and to insure safe and sanitary conditions; providing penalties for violations of such code; and, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-42. - Code remedial. 
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of all buildings including their accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-43. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing structures, accessory buildings and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life, safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. 
(b)  This code establishes minimum standards for occupancy, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement or repair of buildings except such as are contrary to the provisions of this code. 
(c)  Buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of the technical codes for new buildings. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-44. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Repairs, additions or alterations to an existing structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Columbus Technical Codes as set forth in Article III above. 
(b)  Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work shall not cause an existing building to become unsafe as defined in this code. 
(c)  If the occupancy classification of an existing building is changed, the building shall be made to conform to the intent of this code for the new occupancy classification as established by the building official. 
(d)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding paragraphs of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of this code or in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed, but not more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building shall be replaced in any period of 12 months unless the entire roof covering is made to conform with the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(e)  Special historic buildings and districts. The provisions of this code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures, shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within fire districts. The applicant must submit complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(f)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of the code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises 
(g)  Application of zoning ordinance. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the zoning ordinance of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-45. - Organization. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The building official as defined in article III above or such employees of the department of inspections and code as he may designate. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-46. - Powers and duties of housing official. 
(a)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon the premises a condition in violation of this code, the building official or his designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the inspecting official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the inspecting official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  Unsafe buildings. 
(1)  All buildings, or structures used as such, which are unsafe, unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are considered unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings, are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition. 
(2)  Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given as prescribed in this section. Such notice shall: 
a.  Be put in writing; 
b.  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
c.  Allow 45 days to correct major violations with a maximum time limit of 90 days to correct all violations; and, 
d.  State that, if such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, removal or demolition are not voluntarily completed within the stated time as set forth in the notice, the building official shall institute such legal proceedings charging the person or persons, firm, corporation, or agent with a violation of this code. 
(3)  Service of notice shall be as follows: 
a.  By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode the owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or 
b.  By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid thereon; or 
c.  By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises to be repaired. 
(4)  When a residential building is to be demolished, it shall be done so in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code. 
(c)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirement, not specifically covered by this code, found necessary for the safety, health, and general welfare of the occupants of any dwelling, shall be determined by the building official. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, charged with the enforcement of this code, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of this code shall be defended by the city attorney or his designee until the final termination of the proceedings 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall annually submit to the city manager, a report covering the work of the department of inspections and code during the preceding year. 
(f)  Letter of compliance. A letter indicating compliance with the provisions of this code may be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-47. - Inspections. 
The building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of buildings and premises in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of such buildings and of the general public. When there is probable cause to believe that there is or has been a violation or violations of this article, the building official, or his agent, is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all buildings and premises. The owner or occupant of every building, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the building official free access to such building and its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-48. - Hardships. 
Where the literal application of the requirements of this code would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner or tenant or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations therein have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of the building official to the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-49. - Conflict of ordinances. 
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of Columbus, Georgia, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of Columbus, Georgia, existing on the effective date of this article, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-50. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, who shall violate a provision of this article, shall be guilty of an offense; and, if, upon hearing before the recorder, he shall find that any condition or conditions involved constitute a nuisance, the recorder, at his discretion, may order such nuisance abated and/or impose a punishment as set forth in section 1-8 of the code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-50.1. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 8, 5-9-17) 
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-13, § 1, adopted March 4, 1980, repealed former Art. VI, §§ 8-61—8-72, in its entirety; section 2 of said Ord. No. 80-13 enacted, in lieu thereof, a new Art. VI pertaining to the same subject matter. Former §§ 8-61—8-72 were derived from Ord. No. 69-229, §§ 1—12, adopted Nov. 24, 1969 and Ord. No. 73-126, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 1973. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-51—8-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 81-34, enacted May 5, 1981, repealed §§ 8-61—8-67 which comprised former Div. 2, "Demolitions Under Community Development Block Grants." Said provisions derived from Ord. No. 80-13, § 2, enacted March 4, 1980. 

Secs. 8-61—8-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 81-34, enacted May 5, 1981, repealed former § 8-68 which comprised former Div. 3, "Demolition With Voluntary Lien." Said provisions derived from Ord. No. 80-98, § 1, enacted Aug. 5, 1980. 

Secs. 8-68—8-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURE FOR INVOLUNTARY DEMOLITION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 80-111, enacted Sept. 9, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—10 of said ordinance as Div. 4, §§ 8-81—8-90, is at the discretion of the editor. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 8-81—8-90, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-111, §§ 1—10, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 81-34, §§ 2—4, 5-5-81; Ord. No. 89-68, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 92-20, §§ 1 2, 3-31-92; Ord. No. 95-54, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 02-9, § 1, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 14-40, § 1, 7-29-14; Ord. No. 16-10, §§ 1—4, 4-26-16. 

Sec. 8-81.1. - Definitions for Article VI Unsafe Buildings. 
(a)  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to life, property or safety of the public or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, and structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(b)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
(c)  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(d)  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(e)  Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any of the condition or defects described below shall be considered dangerous: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings. 
(2)  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress. 
(3)  Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged. 
(4)  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value. 
(5)  The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
(6)  The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy. 
(7)  The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, become a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
(8)  Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
(9)  A building or structure, used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(10)  Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health. 
(11)  Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-81.2. - Closing of vacant structures. 
When a structure or equipment is found by the building official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
(1)  If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the building official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building official may cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
(2)  Authority to disconnect service utility. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in this code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. 
(3)  Demolition. The building official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the building official's judgement after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, and such that it would cost 50 percent or over of its current appraised value, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option. The boarding of a structure shall be as outlined in Appendix A of the International Property Maintenance Code specifically adopted by this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-82. - Determination of public detriment; hearing. 
All such unsafe, unlawful or dangerous structures are hereby declared to be detrimental to the health and well-being of the public. The procedure for hearing and determining the existence of any such public detriments, and for the abatement thereof, if found to exist, shall be as hereinafter prescribed: 
(1)  Whenever a petition is filed with the building official by any person charging that any building or structure is unsafe as defined above, or whenever it appears to the building official, on his own motion, that any such building or structure is unsafe, the building official shall, if his investigation discloses a basis for such charges, prepare a complaint stating the charges and file said complaint with the city manager of Columbus, Georgia, the Council of Columbus, Georgia, and the owner of the property, if said property owner is known. Copies of the complaint shall be served upon the owner of the property, if known, and parties in interest. 
(2)  Not less than ten days nor more than 30 days following such notice a hearing shall be held before the city manager or his designated agent, at a time and place certain within Columbus, Georgia. The owner and/or parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice, to appear in person, or be represented by an attorney, and give testimony at the time and place fixed. Rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not control in hearings before the city manager or his designated agent. The city manager or his designated agent shall determine at the hearing, on the basis of the evidence presented, whether or not the building or structure is unsafe within the meaning of this article and a nuisance to the public of Columbus, Georgia. 
(3)  If he so determines that the building or structure is unsafe, the city manager or his designated agent shall issue an order, which shall be served upon the owner and/or parties in interest, requiring them, within a reasonable period of time as specified in the order (said period not to exceed 60 days) to either repair, alter or improve, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof and clean the premises of all debris within 30 days after such building or structure has been demolished. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-83. - Repair if cost less than 50 percent; demolition if cost more than 50 percent. 
If the repair, alteration or improvement of the building or structure so as to render it safe can be made at a cost of not more than 50 percent of the then physical value of the building structure as determined by the tax assessors office, the order may require the owner to repair, alter or improve the building or structure so as to render it safe, or to vacate and close the building or structure. If the person responsible fails to comply, the city manager or his designated agent may pursue legal remedies in the recorder's court to have the owner and/or parties in interest cited for failure to comply with the terms of this article. If the cost of such repair, alteration or improvement as would be necessary to make such buildings safe would be in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building or structure as determined by the tax assessors office, the order may require that the building or structure be demolished and removed unless such repair, alteration or improvements as are necessary to make the building or structure safe shall be made within the specified time period. If the person responsible fails to comply with the order, they may be cited for violation of this article, and the building official may cause such structure to be demolished and removed. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-84. - Prohibited use or occupancy. 
The building official, as provided by the technical codes may prohibit the further use or occupancy of a structure which he finds to be unsafe for human occupancy until such structure is repaired, altered or improved, or until the structure is demolished and removed. In this event the building official shall cause to be posted at such entrance to the building or structure a notice which shall read as follows: "This building is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the building official of Columbus, Georgia." Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, alterations or improvements are made or until the demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove such notice without permission of the building official, or for any person to enter or occupy the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs, alterations or improvements or for demolishing the said building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-85. - Demolition costs to become lien against property. 
The amount of the cost of boarding up, demolition or removal of a building and cleaning the lot as approved by City Council shall be a lien against the real property upon which the building or structure is or was situated. Said lien shall be placed upon a special lien book designated "Demolition Lien Book," which shall be maintained by the clerk of superior court of Muscogee County. The director of finance of Columbus, Georgia, shall enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall pay the full amount due on such lien to the director of finance of Columbus, Georgia within 30 days of perfection of such lien, and if such lien is not paid in full within 30 days of the perfection of such lien, the owner or parties in interest shall pay 25 percent of the total lien amount plus seven percent interest within 60 days of the perfection of such lien to the Director of Finance of Columbus, Georgia, with the remaining balance due on such lien to be paid in three equal annual installments with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed; 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner and/or parties in interest at any time, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the director of finance of Columbus, Georgia; and, 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the time for payment of the final annual installment prescribed in subsection (a), said amount shall continue as a lien together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum until paid in full. 
(4)  The city manager is authorized to waive such liens, or any portion thereof, for property identified to be transferred to the Land Bank Authority, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4, for the sole purpose of disposing of the property to an organization contemplated under O.C.G.A. § 48-4-64. Prior to the transfer to the Land Bank Authority, the city's real estate office shall actively market the property for sale for a minimum of 12 months from the date of waiver of the lien. The city manager is also authorized to waive such liens, or any portion thereof, for property in the ownership of an organization contemplated under O.C.G.A. § 48-4-64. 
(5)  In addition to the authority granted in subsection (4), the city manager is authorized to waive any demolition lien, or any portion thereof, when the demolition lien does not exceed $25,000.00. If the demolition lien exceeds $25,000.00, any waiver of such lien, or any portion thereof, must be approved by resolution of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-86. - Service of complaints, notices, orders. 
Complaints, notices or orders issued pursuant to this division shall be served either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the whereabouts of any person who is an owner and/or party in interest is unknown and the whereabouts can not be ascertained by the building official exercising reasonable diligence, and the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint and notice or order upon such party may be made by publishing the same once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in Columbus, Georgia. A copy of such notice served by publication shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises effected by the notice. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-87. - Emergency situations. 
In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is imminent danger to the life or safety of any person or to the safety of any other property, the building official shall cause such building to be made safe or shall order the demolition of the building or structure and the cost of such repair or demolition shall be recovered and collected as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-88. - Appeals. 
When an owner and/or party in interest feels that he has been aggrieved by a determination of the city manager or his designated agent, he shall have the right of appeal to the Council of Columbus, which appeal shall be filed in writing within 15 days of the notice of a determination made by the city manager or his designated agent. The owner or parties in interest may be granted only one extension by the Columbus Council from compliance with an order issued under section 8-82(3), such extension not to exceed 120 days. If the owner is still aggrieved, he may exercise other rights of appeal as provided by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-89. - Severability. 
This article is herewith expressly declared to be severable. If any phrase, sentence, or paragraph hereof shall be found or declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, sentences, and paragraphs hereof shall remain in full force and effect as if enacted without the phrase, sentence, or paragraph declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 8-90. - Penalty for violation of division. 
The penalty for violation of this article shall be as provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. Each day a violation continues after the notice periods provided by this division have run shall constitute a separate offense." 
(Ord. No. 17-19, § 9, 5-9-17) 
Chapter 9 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-197, §§ 1—16, adopted Oct. 10, 1972, effected changes in Ch. 9 as indicated below. Due to the extent of amendment, editorial analysis is omitted except for an explanation of deleted provisions. Sec. 1. Amended § 9-1 Sec. 2. Repealed § 9-2 Sec. 3. Amended § 9-3 Sec. 4. Amended § 9-8 Sec. 5. Amended § 9-13 Sec. 6. Repealed § 9-19(b) Sec. 7. Repealed § 9-24 Sec. 8. Amended § 9-30 Sec. 9. Amended § 9-33(b) Sec. 10. Amended § 9-36 Sec. 11. Amended § 9-42 Sec. 12. Amended § 9-44 Sec. 13. Repealed § 9-45 Sec. 14. Amended § 9-47 Sec. 15. Amended § 9-48 Sec. 16. Added § 9-53 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Burial in streets, etc.; in lots, authorization, holding city harmless. 
No body shall be buried in any of the streets, lanes, nor walkways in any city cemetery. No body shall be buried in any lot in any city cemetery until after the written interment request has been properly executed by the lot owner or relative of the deceased or the funeral director in charge of the funeral arrangements. Such interment request shall be submitted to the sexton or cemetery superintendent at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled time of burial services. Such interment request shall be of the following form: 
INTERMENT REQUEST-CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA 
Date _______, 19 ___. 
You are hereby authorized and instructed, subject to your rules and regulations to enter the remains of _______Grave Space No._______, Lot No._______, Section_______ Cemetery_______ Owner of said lot being (or Deed) _______ 
The deceased was age _______, Sex _______, Social Security No. _______, Residence _______ DATE OF DEATH _______, DATE OF BIRTH _______ 
I hereby certify that I am the _______ 
(Relative, Lot Owner or Funeral Director) 
of the above named decedent and this is your authority to make disposition of the remains of said decedent as above indicated. I further certify and represent that I have the right and legal authority to direct this disposition of the decedent's remains in the aforestated lot and grave space, being aware of no ownership claims to the contrary, and I agree to hold the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia harmless from any liability on account of said authorization and interment. 
Authorized Signature ___________ 
Address ___________ 
(Name of Funeral Director) 
This request shall be submitted to the sexton or cemetery superintendent not less than 24 hours before the burial service is scheduled. The burial service shall not be scheduled later than 4:30 p.m. 
I hereby authorize the above interment: 
Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, By: ___________ 
The interment request shall be executed in triplicate, the original of which shall be filed at the cemetery, one copy shall be forwarded to the clerk of council for his files and the third copy shall be submitted to the funeral director in charge of the funeral arrangements. It shall be the duty of the sexton or the cemetery superintendent to obtain the executed interment request prior to the opening of the grave. 
(Code 1914, § 582; Ord. No. 72-197, § 1, 10-10-72; Ord. No. 18-9, § 1, 3-27-18, eff. 4-1-18) 
Sec. 9-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-197, § 2, adopted Oct. 10, 1972, repealed former § 9-2 pertaining to the issuance of a burial permit. Said section was derived from Code 1914, § 201. 
Sec. 9-3. - Disposition of the remains of indigent persons. 
In order to satisfy the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5 and O.C.G.A. § 31-21-21, pertaining to deceased indigents, Columbus will undertake the following obligations. The determination of indigency will be made by the Columbus Office of the Department of Human Resources, Division of Family and Children Services (DFACS). Once that determination is certified by DFACS and provided to the cemetery sexton, Columbus will offer the following options to dispose of the remains: 
(1)  Where the person asserting the right to direct the disposition of the body under O.C.G.A. § 31-21-7 ("the authorizing agent") authorizes cremation of the indigent, he or she must authorize the funeral home to release the cremains into the custody of the cemetery sexton in lieu of any other direction which might otherwise be made pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-18-80. The cemetery sexton will accept all indigent cremains for any indigent so certified by DFACS for storage in a vault. Upon notification from the sexton of acceptance of the cremains and certification from the funeral home that all necessary steps to apply for a death certificate have been completed, the director of public works shall pay the funeral home which provided the cremation service a fee of $600.00. 
(2)  Where burial is requested by the authorizing agent, the cemetery sexton will provide a grave space and grave opening in the pauper burial ground. All indigents shall be buried at a time and date approved by the sexton. The funeral home which has custody of the body, and provides for its transportation and burial will receive a payment in the amount of $400.00 upon certification to the director of public works from the sexton that the burial is complete and certification of the funeral home that all necessary steps to apply for a death certificate have been completed. 
(3)  Once the remains of an individual have been tendered to the city for burial or storage pursuant to subsections (1) or (2) above, any requests for the release of cremains, the marking of a burial plot, or the disinterment of a body for burial elsewhere will be made to the cemetery sexton who shall require reimbursement of any funds expended by the city in connection with the initial burial or cremation as well as any additional costs to be incurred by the city in accommodating the requested alternative disposition; provided however, the director of the department of public works will have the authority to waive some or all the required fees upon an administrative investigation and a finding that a full or partial waiver is warranted by the financial circumstances of the authorizing agent requesting such treatment and other compelling circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, 2-5-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2013, repealed the former § 9-3, and enacted a § 9-3 as set out herein. The § 9-3 pertained to paupers; ground; expense; certificate and derived from the Code of 1914, § 587; and Ord. No. 72-197, § 3, adopted 10-10-72. 
State Law reference— As to city as trustee of cemeteries, see Ga. Code, § 69-503, which section is included in Part II of this volume. 
Sec. 9-4. - Sale of lots; receipt; deed. 
The selling of previously unowned lots in the cemeteries owned by the city shall be done by the city clerk, who shall make out and deliver to the purchaser upon receipt of the purchase money, a deed to the same, which deed shall be signed by the mayor and the clerk, upon behalf of the city. 
All deeds shall contain the stipulation that they are issued pursuant to this chapter, and are subject to the terms hereof. 
Effective April 1, 2018, it shall be required that all secondary transfers of lots originally purchased pursuant to this section shall be filed with the clerk of the city at the time of transfer in order for such deed to authorize burial in a designated lot. The clerk shall also accept any prior secondary transfers for recording in accordance with this code section. 
Effective April 1, 2018, all burials in a city lot will require one of the following: 1) proof of family relationship to the last lot owner shown by the records of the sextant; 2) the existence of a deed of purchase filed with the clerk of council in accordance with the above referenced paragraph; 3) a certified copy of a deed filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Muscogee County. 
(Code 1914, § 583; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 28; Ord. No. 74-32, § 1, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 18-9, § 2, 3-27-18, eff. 4-1-18) 
Sec. 9-5. - Vehicles in cemeteries—Those prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any automobile, truck, dray, wagon, taxicab or other business vehicle to enter or pass through the city cemeteries in the city except when such vehicles are actually engaged in delivering or receiving materials, articles or passengers in such cemeteries. 
(Code 1914, § 584; Ord. of 8-29-36, § 1) 
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Funeral processions, other; speed; turning; in driveways only. 
Funeral processions, upon entering a city cemetery, shall be under the control and subject to the direction of the sexton. Automobiles or other vehicles shall not be allowed to proceed at a greater speed than ten miles per hour when within the cemetery enclosure. Such vehicles shall not turn around in the driveways but must continue to the next street intersection before turning. All vehicles shall remain at all times within the confines of the established driveways. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, §§ 11, 34; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 24) 
Sec. 9-7. - Injury to property, trees, etc.—Picnicking; firearms. 
No person in the city cemeteries shall pick flowers of any kind, break branches from shrubs or trees, or climb fences to the cemeteries or trees located therein. Picnicking, lunching, lounging, shooting or loud and boisterous or disorderly conduct are forbidden in the cemeteries. No person with firearms shall be permitted to enter the cemetery grounds. 
(Code 1914, § 585; Ord. of 10-14-24, § 33; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 23) 
Cross reference— Planting trees and shrubs, § 9-16; planting trees in perpetual care sections, § 9-27. 
Sec. 9-8. - Same—Reward. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to offer a reward of $100.00 for information leading to the conviction of any persons guilty of committing depredations in the cemetery. 
(Code 1914, § 588; Ord. No. 72-197, § 4, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-9. - Rubbish—Removal, time allowed. 
All piles of earth, brick, mortar beds, rubbish or building materials of any kind shall be removed by the party placing the same in the city cemeteries within 24 hours after the completion of any work which may be done in the cemetery. 
All broken copings, monuments and stones shall be removed by owners of cemetery lots within 30 days. 
All sunken lots and graves shall be filled and leveled by owners of cemetery lots within 30 days. 
(Code 1914, § 586; Ord. No. 66-30, § 1, 3-7-66) 
Cross reference— Disposition of garbage, trash and waste, § 13-167 et seq. 
Sec. 9-10. - Same—Placing or leaving. 
The placing or leaving of empty cans, flower pots, vases, weeds, decayed flowers or plants or any rubbish, on the lots or in the streets of the city cemeteries is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 32; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 22) 
Sec. 9-11. - Children, unattended; sexton's duty. 
It shall be unlawful for children under the age of 12 years to enter into or upon the grounds of any cemetery of the city unless such child be accompanied by some older person, and it is hereby made the duty of the sextons of the cemeteries to see that this section is enforced. 
(Code 1914, § 589) 
Sec. 9-12. - Dogs prohibited; sexton's duty. 
No dog shall be allowed to enter a cemetery enclosure. It shall be the duty of the sexton, to inform persons visiting the grounds, of this section and also to report all violations hereof. 
(Code 1914, § 590) 
Cross reference— Control of dogs and cats, § 5-10. 
Sec. 9-13. - Grave opening and closing fees. 
The cemetery superintendent shall receive each of the following applicable fees as listed: 

 
(Code 1914, § 592; Ord. No. 58-15, § 2; Ord. No. 58-28, § 1; Ord. No. 63-37, § 1, 4-22-63; Ord. No. 69-88, § 1, 5-26-69; Ord. No. 69-193, § 1, 10-20-69; Ord. No. 72-197, § 5, 10-10-72; Ord. No. 74-32, § 2, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 5-12-81; Ord. No. 97-68, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 97-110, 9-30-97; Ord. No. 03-45, § 3, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 16-25, § 1, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 18-9, § 3, 3-27-18; Ord. No. 18-9, § 3, 3-27-18, eff. 4-1-18) 
Sec. 9-14. - New enclosures; approval. 
No new fences, walls, copings or other enclosures shall be placed upon or around any private burial lot in the cemeteries of the city, except upon plans submitted to and approved by the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1914, § 594) 
Cross reference— Further provisions relevant to enclosures, § 9-26. 
Sec. 9-15. - Repair of structures; changing location. 
In repairing any fences, walls or copings now in use the work shall be done as directed by the superintendent of public works and when such repairs are made the superintendent of public works shall have authority to change the location of the walls, copings or fencing in order to make them correspond with the lines of the streets and alleys as nearly as possible, the work to be done under the direction of such superintendent. 
(Code 1914, § 595) 
Sec. 9-16. - Trees, shrubs; planting, permit. 
The planting of all shrubs and all trees, other than flowers, in the cemeteries of the city shall be done only after permission first has been obtained from the superintendent of public works and shall be done under the supervision and direction of the sexton of the cemetery where planted. 
(Code 1914, § 800) 
Cross reference— For further provisions relevant to trees, see §§ 9-7, 9-27. 
Sec. 9-17. - Hours of admission. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any cemetery in the city between the hours beginning at sunset and ending at seven o'clock a.m. except by permission of the sexton of such cemetery, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-33, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 14) 
Sec. 9-17.1. - Supervision, superintendent of public works. 
The supervision of all the streets and alleys in the cemetery belonging to the city is hereby placed under the direction and control of the superintendent of public works with full power and authority to keep and maintain the same in suitable condition for travel thereon and to do this, said superintendent shall have authority to make surveys, establish lines and grades. 
The superintendent of public works shall also have full power and authority and he is hereby obligated to go upon any lot which is not kept up to the standards required of owners by sections 9-9 and 9-10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbus and to do any and all things the owners themselves are thereby obligated to do but which have not been done by the owners within the time required, or which the owners have suffered to exist in violation of the requirements of said sections. Nothing herein shall be construed as relieving the owners of any lot of keeping the said lot up to said standards, nor shall it be construed as interfering with the obligations of the City of Columbus regarding upkeep under the perpetual care program. 
(Code 1914, § 593; Ord. No. 66-30, § 2, 3-7-66) 
ARTICLE II. - PERPETUAL CARE SECTIONS 

Sec. 9-18. - Definition of term. 
The term "perpetual care", as used herein, means the sodding of graves, the cutting of grass upon lots and graves at reasonable intervals, the raking and cleaning of lots and of grave surfaces, the care and pruning of lots and trees, and the keeping in repair of enclosures, streets, walks and borders, so that such entire perpetual care sections shall present a neat and uniform appearance. 
The term "perpetual care", as used herein, does not mean the maintaining, repairing or replacing of any grave stone or monumental structure erected upon a lot in such sections. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 39; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 25) 
Sec. 9-19. - Description of sections. 
(a)  Eastern part of Linwood Cemetery. The eastern part of Linwood Cemetery in the city is hereby established as a perpetual care section, such section comprising lots numbers one to 298, both inclusive, together with the streets contiguous to such lots, all as shown on that certain drawing in the office of the city engineer, dated October 20, 1947, and entitled "Drawing No. D-127, Perpetual Care Section of Linwood Cemetery". A copy of such drawing is of record in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Muscogee County, Georgia, in Plat Book five, page 176. 
(b)  Riverdale Cemetery. Central Circle, Sections 11, 12, 13, 15-B, 42-A, 42-B and 42-C. 
(b.1) East Porterdale Cemetery. All grave spaces sold since August 4, 1969. 
(c)  Other individually owned lots. All other individually owned lots not described in subsections (a), (b) and (b.1) above are hereby declared to be perpetual care sections, upon compliance by the owner with the provisions of section 9-21 relating to perpetual care charges of all other individually owned lots. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 1; Ord. No. 61-27, § 1, 3-27-61; Ord. No. 72-197, § 5, 10-10-72; Ord. No. 74-32, § 3, 2-5-74) 
Sec. 9-20. - Authority in charge. 
The superintendent of public works of the city, hereinafter designated "superintendent", shall have charge of all perpetual care sections in the city, and is authorized to enforce the provisions hereof. Subject to the orders of the city manager, the superintendent is authorized to maintain order, to supervise all workmen, visitors and drivers, to expel from the grounds any improper person, or those who violate the rules, and to refuse admission to any person or materials when he may deem such action necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 1) 
Sec. 9-21. - Purchase price; perpetual care charge. 
(a)  Linwood Cemetery. The purchase price of each lot in the perpetual care section of Linwood Cemetery shall be on the basis of $0.50 per square foot, receipts from such sales to become part of the general operations fund of the city. 
In addition to such purchase price, the purchaser shall pay to the city, at the time of purchase, $1.25 per square foot for perpetual care of such lot, such charge for perpetual care to be deposited in the perpetual care fund hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  Riverdale Cemetery. Such fees and charges for Riverdale Cemetery are as set by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  Other individually owned lots. The owners of individually owned lots not described in subsections (a) and (b) of section 9-19 are hereby authorized to place their individually owned lots under perpetual care by the payment to the city of the sum of $600.00 for each lot. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 26; Ord. No. 61-27, § 2, 3-27-61) 
Sec. 9-22. - Fund, Linwood Cemetery; deposit; investing. 
There is hereby established a perpetual care fund for the perpetual care section of Linwood Cemetery, to be composed of funds received from the charges for perpetual care, as set forth in the preceding section hereof. The moneys of such fund shall be deposited by the treasury of the city in a bank or banks in the city, kept separate from all other funds in the custody of the city, and shall be designated on the books of the treasurer and on the accounts of the bank or banks in which such funds are deposited as "Linwood Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund." 
From time to time, as charges for perpetual care are accumulated by the city and paid into such perpetual care fund, such funds shall be invested by the treasurer and the city manager in interest-bearing securities which are now, or which may be at the time of such investment, legal investments for trustees under the laws of Georgia. The power to invest such funds shall include the power, from time to time, to reinvest such funds in the class of securities in this section named. 
The perpetual care fund hereby established shall be used solely for the perpetual care of such section of Linwood Cemetery, as the term "Perpetual Care" is defined in section 9-18 hereof. 
It is the intention hereof that the income and not the corpus, of such perpetual care fund shall be used for the perpetual care of such section of Linwood Cemetery; provided, however, pending the time when such perpetual care fund has accumulated to an amount as will produce an income sufficient for the care of such section as contemplated by this article, such portions of the corpus as may be necessary may be used for the care of such section. 
(Ord. of 5-17-49, § 27) 
Sec. 9-22.1. - Fund, individually owned lots. 
There is hereby established a perpetual care fund for the perpetual care of individually owned lots as described in subsection (c) of section 9-19 of this code. The moneys of such fund shall be deposited by the treasurer of the city, kept separate from all other funds in the custody of the city, and shall be designated on the books of the treasurer and on the accounts of the bank or banks in which such funds are deposited as "Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund under Sec. 9-19 (c)." Such perpetual care fund shall be operated in the same manner and for the same purposes and intention as expressed in section 9-22 for the Linwood Cemetery Fund. 
(Ord. No. 61-27, § 3, 3-27-61) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 61-27 amended the Code by adding § 9-22.1 as set out above. 
Sec. 9-23. - Sale—Subject to rules. 
All lots to be sold in such perpetual care section shall be subject to the rules and regulations relating to cemeteries in the city now of force or which may hereafter be adopted and which do not conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 3; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 2; Ord. No. 70-22, § 1, 1-26-70) 
Note— Ord. No. 70-22, § 1, amended § 9-23 by deleting the last sentence which limited the use of lots to the burial of persons of the Caucasian race. 
Cross reference— For further provisions relevant to sale of lots, see § 9-4. 
Sec. 9-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-197, § 7, adopted Oct. 10, 1972, repealed former § 9-24 pertaining to the sale of lots in Riverdale Cemetery. Said section was derived from Ord. of Oct. 14, 1924, § 5. 
Sec. 9-25. - Perpetual care to apply; extra improvements, instructions. 
All lots and graves in such perpetual care sections shall be sold subject to perpetual care, as hereinafter defined, and maintained under the direction of the superintendent. Extra improvements and embellishments of lots and graves shall be done in accordance with this chapter and with instructions issued by the superintendent in each instance. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 4; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 3) 
Sec. 9-26. - Enclosures prohibited; corner stones, position. 
No enclosure of any nature, such as fences, copings, hedges, ditches, flower beds or other means of marking boundaries of lots or graves shall be used in such perpetual care sections, except corner stones to lots. Such corner stones shall be set even with the surface of the ground and only by cemetery employees. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 7; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 4) 
Cross reference— For other provisions relevant to enclosures, see § 9-14. 
Sec. 9-27. - Trees, shrubs, etc.; planting, pruning; removal. 
No trees, shrubs, plants or flowers may be planted other than in conformity with the general landscape plan of such perpetual care section, and the same shall not be planted, pruned or removed without the consent of the superintendent. 
Acting for the best interest of the cemetery, the superintendent shall have the authority to prune, remove or transplant any tree, shrub, plant, flower or anything upon a lot, when he may consider such course necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 8; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 5) 
Cross reference— For other provisions relevant to trees, see §§ 9-7, 9-16. 
Sec. 9-28. - Ornamental trinkets; removal without notice. 
Glass boxes, artificial flowers, shells, toys, settees or ornaments of any kind shall not be allowed upon lots or graves, and will be removed by cemetery employees without notice; chairs, settees, vases or urns which are broken or in dilapidated condition will be removed by cemetery employees without notice. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 9; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 6) 
Sec. 9-29. - Mounds; established grades. 
Grave mounds shall not be allowed. No part of any lot or grave shall be raised above the established grade. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 10; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 7) 
Sec. 9-30. - Markers; specifications; location. 
Only one single marker will be permitted to each grave and this marker shall be placed at the head of the grave. All single markers must be at least four inches in height, not less than eight nor more than 14 inches in width, and not more than 24 inches in length; the top of the marker to be set level with and following the contour of the ground. No single marker shall be set to embrace more than one grave. Markers on any lot must be uniform in size and material and shall be made of marble or granite. Double markers shall not be permitted to embrace more than two graves abutting side by side and such marker shall be placed at the head of the abutting graves. Double markers shall be at least four inches in thickness, not less than eight nor more than 14 inches in width, and not more than six feet in length. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 20; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 8; Ord. No. 72-197, § 8, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-31. - Monument—Foundation; specifications; construction supervision. 
The foundations for all monuments, mausoleums, tombs or vaults must be of solid masonry or concrete and of sufficient size and depth for the superstructure, the upper surface to be at least two inches below the established lot surface, and shall be built under the direction of the superintendent at the expense of the lot owner. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 24; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 10) 
Sec. 9-32. - Same—Removal; permission. 
Where markers or monuments are placed upon any lot sold, no removal of same shall be permitted to be made under claim that they are not paid for, nor for other reasons, without authority from the owner of the lot and the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 26; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 12) 
Sec. 9-33. - Same—Number allowed; location. 
(a)  Linwood Cemetery. To avoid the crowding of monuments, and consequent unsightly appearance of the grounds, only one monument will be allowed on each numbered lot of the perpetual care section of Linwood Cemetery; and such monument shall be located in accordance with one of the typical lot plans kept on record in the office of the superintendent. 
(b)  Riverdale Cemetery. To avoid the crowding of monuments and consequent unsightly appearance of the grounds, no monument in Riverdale Cemetery will be allowed on a tract covering less than 200 square feet, and only one monument, mausoleum, tomb or vault will be allowed on any tract, and such monument, mausoleum, tomb or vault shall be located in accordance with one of the various typical lot plans on record in the office of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 11-18-35, § 21; Ord. of 10-14-24, § 9; Ord. No. 72-197, § 9, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-34. - Same——Like design in Riverdale Cemetery. 
Not more than one monument, mausoleum, tomb or vault of the same design shall be erected in the same section of Riverdale Cemetery without special permission of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 22) 
Sec. 9-35. - Same—Charges paid before placing. 
No monument shall be allowed to be placed on a lot against which any charges remain unpaid. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 18) 
Sec. 9-36. - Same—Size in Riverdale Cemetery; submitting plan. 
No monument, mausoleum, tomb or vault shall cover more than ten percent of the ground space of the lot. The design and specifications of monuments, mausoleums, tombs and vaults must first be submitted to the superintendent for approval. The placing or setting of work shall not be allowed without the consent of the superintendent. 
No monument shall be less than eight inches thick, not less than 24 inches nor more than 36 inches in height, above the ground surface. No monument base shall exceed 24 inches in width nor five feet in length nor six inches in thickness. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 23; Ord. No. 72-197, § 9, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-37. - Same—Deposit before erection in Riverdale Cemetery. 
Before any vault, tomb, or mausoleum is erected above ground, the proprietor must deposit with the city treasurer a sum equal to 15 percent of the cost of such structure, such sum to be added to the perpetual care fund and the income used for the proper care of such structure. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 28) 
Sec. 9-38. - Construction work; time for completion. 
All construction work must be completed as fast as possible under the direction of the superintendent, and materials not used must be removed as the work is completed. No material shall be received and no work shall be started on Saturday which cannot be completed on that day. In order to protect the lawns from injury, heavy material must be moved over planks placed for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 25; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 11) 
Sec. 9-39. - Extra work; payment; supervision. 
If extra work is required, such as a concrete vault, decorating grave, furnishing lowering device, shelter tent, etc., the charges must be paid when the order is given. All such work is to be done by cemetery employees only, under the direction of the superintendent, at the expense of the lot owner. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 13; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 13) 
Sec. 9-40. - Workmen; control of superintendent. 
Within the confines of the cemetery, all workmen shall be subject to the direction and control of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 30; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 15) 
Sec. 9-41. - One interment in same grave; exception. 
In the perpetual acre sections only one interment shall be made in the same grave, except the mother and infant, or two children in one casket. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 14; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 16) 
Sec. 9-42. - Burial; certificate required; digging ordered, time. 
No interment shall be permitted or body received unless the proper burial certificate is furnished by the commissioner of health of Muscogee County, Georgia; the certificate to give the name and residence of the deceased, the name of the nearest relative, and the time, place and cause of death. Digging of graves must be ordered at least eight working hours before the interment is to take place. 
Funeral directors whose principle place of business is located in Columbus, Georgia or Phenix City, Alabama who hold a valid business license issued by the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia and who are in good standing with said consolidated government shall be allowed 30 days from date of interment to file said burial permit with the clerk of council. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 2; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 17; Ord. No. 72-197, § 11, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-43. - Disinterment—By whom made; consent. 
No disinterment shall be made except by cemetery employees with the written consent of the commissioner of health of Muscogee County, Georgia, and of the next-of-kin of the deceased. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 15; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 18) 
Sec. 9-44. - Same—Charges, paid in advance. 
All fees and charges representing purchase price of cemetery lots and grave spaces and all charges for interments, disinterments, grave openings and other work or services shall be paid in advance, provided however, all funeral directors whose principle place of business is located in Columbus, Georgia or Phenix City, Alabama and who are in good standing with consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia and holding a valid business license issued by said consolidated government, shall have the privilege of allowing such fees and charges to accrue to the last day of the month during which such charges and fees were incurred. All such charges and fees shall be due and payable to the consolidated government on or before the tenth day of the month following the month in which such charges and fees were incurred. In the event a funeral director fails to pay his account in full by said due date such funeral director shall no longer have the privilege of accruing his account until all past due charges and fees have been paid in full. All funeral directors whose principle place of business is not located within Columbus, Georgia or Phenix City, Alabama shall not be permitted to make any interments or disinterments in city owned cemeteries until all charges and fees in connection therewith have been paid in full in advance and the proper burial permit or state transmittal permit has been submitted to the sexton or cemetery superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 17; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 19; Ord. No. 72-197, § 12, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-197, § 13, adopted Oct. 10, 1972, repealed former § 9-45, derived from Ord. of Oct. 14, 1924, § 16. Said section pertained to charges for removal of a body from a single grave in Riverdale Cemetery. 
Sec. 9-46. - Advertisements; signs. 
Dealers' and manufacturers' cards or advertisements shall not be cut or marked on any stone or placed anywhere within the cemetery enclosure. No sign indicating that a lot, portion of lot, tomb or stone, nor any other material or articles located in such cemeteries is for sale, shall be permitted in such section. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24 §,§ 29, 38; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 20) 
Sec. 9-47. - Leaving articles; responsibility of city. 
The city will not be responsible for loss or damage to markers, monuments, copings, fences or any other article placed or left upon any lot, grave or any other part of the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 31; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 21; Ord. No. 72-197, § 14, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-48. - Speculation in lots; forfeiture. 
To avoid speculation in lots, no lot, after being sold by the city, shall be resold at any time by a purchaser for a consideration in excess of the amount which the city currently receives for a similar size lot, plus the separate charges, if any, collected by the city prior to the date of resale for perpetual care purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 6; Ord. of 5-17-49, § 26; Ord. No. 72-197, § 15, 10-10-72) 
Sec. 9-49. - Assignment of lots, Riverdale Cemetery; consent of superintendent. 
No sale or assignment of any lot or part of any lot in Riverdale Cemetery shall be valid without the consent of the superintendent endorsed on the conveyance. Lot owners shall not allow interments on their lots for a remuneration. 
(Ord. of 10-14-24, § 6) 
Secs. 9-50—9-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 9-50, prohibiting cemetery employees from accepting fees or tips and providing that accounts be settled at the office; § 9-51, excluding persons violating cemetery rules from the grounds; and § 9-52, providing for changing cemetery rules, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Ord. of Oct. 14, 1924, §§ 36, 37, 39. 
Sec. 9-53. - Burial of animals, etc., prohibited. 
All city cemeteries are reserved for the purpose of burying the remains of members of the human race. The burying of the remains or carcasses of animals, fowls or pets of any kind in any city owned or controlled cemetery is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 72-197, § 16, 10-10-72) 
Chapter 10 - DEALERS IN SECONDHAND JEWELRY, PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fleamarkets, Ch. 11B; junk and scrap metal dealers, § 14-41; purchase and sale of articles commonly stolen and traded, § 14-81 et seq.; pawnbrokers, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Dealer in gold and silver shall mean any person engaged in whole or in part, in the business of buying, trading or selling coins, jewelry, gold, silver, precious metals, etc., of any description from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
Gems. The following stones are hereby designated "gems" for the purpose of this chapter: Diamonds, emeralds, rubies and sapphires. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity, however organized. 
Precious metals shall mean the following: 
(1)  Gold: 
(a)  Metallic items, 100 percent gold—24-karat; 
(b)  Metallic items, 75 percent gold—18-karat; 
(c)  Metallic items, 56.25 percent gold—14-karat; 
(d)  Metallic items, 39.1 percent gold—10-karat; 
(e)  Metallic items, 29 percent to 39 percent gold—7-to 9-karat; 
(f)  Metallic items, 20 percent gold or greater by weight. 
(Metallic items of less quantity than 20 percent gold by weight or content shall be nonprecious metal.) 
(2)  Silver: 
(a)  All 100 percent silver metal items—Pure silver; 
(b)  All 92.5 percent silver metal items—Sterling silver; 
(c)  All 90 percent silver metal items—Coin silver; 
(d)  All 80 percent silver metal items—European silver; 
(e)  All metallic items of silver containing 50 percent or more silver by weight or content. 
(Metallic items of less quantity than 50 percent silver by weight or content are not termed precious metals.) 
(3)  Platinum: All metallic items containing platinum are declared to be precious metals. 
(4)  Iridium: All metallic items containing iridium are declared to be precious metals. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-2. - Business license—Required; application. 
Any person within Columbus, Georgia, shall, before engaging in whole or in part, in the business of buying, trading or selling coins, jewelry, gold, silver, precious metals, etc., from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers, file with the revenue collection division of Columbus, Georgia, an application for a business license to conduct and carry on said business as a dealer in gold and silver. The revenue collection division shall furnish the Columbus Police Department with a copy of said application at which time the police department shall verify the criminal criteria in the application and furnish the revenue collection division with their findings and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Exemptions. 
The provisions hereof shall not apply when the item traded in is an item originally purchased from the dealer to whom it is traded. Said dealer shall be required, however, to demand positive identification of person trading in such item to demand proof that said person is the legal owner of such item. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-4. - Same—Restrictions. 
No such license shall be issued to: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community; 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving theft-related offenses within five years of issuance or renewal of license; 
(4)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause; 
(5)  A person who, at the time of the application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license under first application; 
(6)  A copartnership, unless one of the members of such copartnership owning not less than five percent interest therein shall be qualified to obtain such a license; 
(7)  A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than five percent of the stock in such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than a residence within Columbus, Georgia; 
(8)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81; Ord. No. 83-4, § 1, 2-22-83; Ord. No. 95-26, 4-18-95) 
Sec. 10-5. - Same—Application requirements; oath. 
(A)  The application for said business shall be signed and dated by the applicant and contain answers to the following questions: 
(1)  What is the kind of business to be operated? 
(2)  What is the name of the business? 
(3)  What is the location where such business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number of said location? 
(4)  What is the name of the applicant for the license, and the home address and telephone number of said applicant? 
(5)  Where has applicant resided for the six months preceding the date of this application? 
(6)  What was the applicant's previous home address, and how long was applicant a resident there? 
(7)  What is the Social Security number of said applicant? 
(8)  Applicant intends to do business as: 
Individual; or 
Partnership; or 
Corporation? 
(9)  Personnel of applicant: If the applicant is an individual, name the individual applying; if a partnership, name all the members of the partnership; if a corporation, name the president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer, as well as the board of directors; list all employees by name, title (individual, partner or corporation), age and residence address. 
(10)  Who is the landlord or owner of said location, and what is the address and telephone number of said landlord or owner? 
(11)  Has the applicant or any person connected with, employed by or having any interest in said business: 
(a)  Been charged or convicted of any violation of law (other than minor traffic violations) in any locality? 
(b)  Served time in prison, or other correctional institution? 
(12)  If the answer to section (a) of the above question is "yes," state the circumstances in detail. Information must be complete as to dates, charges, court jurisdiction and disposition for each person. If the answer to section (b) of the above question is "yes," state the circumstances in detail. Information must be complete as to the charge on which convicted, name of prison or correctional institution, length of time served, date of release from prison or correctional institution, whether sentence has been completed, or whether on probation or parole, and the terms thereof. 
(13)  Give the name, home address and telephone number and place of employment of two persons who are residents of Columbus, Georgia, who are familiar with your character and reputation. 
(B)  The following oath shall be required on the application: 
"All of the following information is hereby given and all of the foregoing statements are hereby made on oath, willfully, knowingly and absolutely, and the same is hereby sworn to be true under penalty for false swearing, as provided by law. 

Sworn to and subscribed before me, this_______day of_______, 19_______. 

(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-6. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia, shall have the right and privilege of granting or declining, within 60 days of the date of application, a business license to conduct said business, and if the same shall be granted, it shall be subject, however, to suspension or revocation for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon three days' prior written notice to holder of such receipt, the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such business license shall consist of a violation of any provision of this chapter or violation of any state or federal law involving theft-related offenses by the person or any officer, agent, representative or employee of the person. 
(b)  Said business license shall not be transferable from person to person or location to location and shall expire at the end of each calendar year and may be renewable only in the manner and form provided in this section. 
(c)  Those persons who held valid 1980 licenses pertaining to secondhand jewelry, gold and precious metals and who are in good standing shall, upon filing an application under this chapter, be allowed to continue an operation until such time as a 1981 license has been issued or denied without suffering any penalty for late purchase of such license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-7. - Same—Rate. 
The business license rate for the above-described business shall be $300.00 for each location. Any licensed pawnbroker or jeweler wishing to transact business under this chapter shall be required to fulfill all requirements under this chapter and shall pay a fee of $100.00 per year in addition to any other license fee issued under any other ordinance or ordinances. Provided, however, that all such licenses shall be issued to the same location. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-8. - Gross receipts tax. 
The gross receipts tax under this chapter shall be $2.50 per $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-9. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations are hereby established, and shall govern the conduct and operation of every such place of business, and every person owning and operating such place of business: 
(1)  Contents of record book. Every person shall maintain a book, in permanent form in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase or sale the following information: 
(a)  The date of the transaction; 
(b)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(c)  The name and address of the customer, a description of the general appearance of the customer; and the number from the customer's valid driver's license, military I.D. card, alcoholic beverage card, or any other means of identification that contains birthdate, sex, race and address; 
(d)  An identification and description of the purchased goods, or sold goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon. In addition, the dealer shall furnish any other identifying information that may be required on forms prescribed and furnished to dealer by the Columbus Police Department; 
(e)  The price paid; 
(f)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price; and 
(g)  The signature of the customer. 
(2)  Recorded entries; availability for inspection. Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any officer of the Columbus Police Department or representative of the revenue collection division's office during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(3)  Maintenance period for records. The record of each purchase or sale transaction, as herein provided, shall be maintained for a period of not less than two years. 
(4)  Holding period for merchandise. All merchandise purchased shall be maintained for inspection by an officer of the Columbus Police Department or representative of the revenue collection division's office for a period of not less than 15 days after the date of purchase. All items shall be maintained in the same condition as they existed when purchased by dealer; provided, however, that a licensee under this chapter need not hold such items for 15 days if he has purchased them from another licensee under this chapter who has held the same items for the required 15 days. 
(5)  Purchases from minors. No merchandise shall be purchased from any individual under 18 years of age. 
(6)  List of employees required. Each person shall be required to furnish an updated list to the Columbus Police Department of all new employees, whether temporary or permanent. All employees shall be subject to a thorough police check along the same standards as set forth for the licensee, except for residency. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 10-10. - Violation; penalty. 
All persons failing to comply with this chapter shall be punished according to section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Chapter 10A - ENTERPRISE ZONES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10A-1—10A-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLUMBUS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the city and the discretion of the editor, the provisions of Ord. No. 98-30 have been included herein as Art. II, §§ 10A-31—10A-37 of a new Ch. 10A. 

Sec. 10A-31. - Enterprise zone—Designated. 
The council hereby designates the area described in Exhibit A of Ordinance No. 98-30 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as an enterprise zone to be known as the "Columbus Business Development Center." 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 1, 4-7-98) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A of Ord. No. 98-30, adopted April 7, 1998, has not been included within the Code, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 98-30, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10A-32. - Same—Qualifications. 
The council finds the area meets the qualifications of the Georgia Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997 (the Act). 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 2, 4-7-98) 
Sec. 10A-33. - Same—Incentives. 
The council hereby ordains and declares that upon designation of the area as an enterprise zone, the consolidated government shall provide the following incentives in the area, including tax incentives, to qualifying businesses in accordance with the definition of such businesses outlined in the Act, which are not applicable throughout the city: 
(1)  The consolidated government shall exempt qualifying businesses as outlined in the Act and further in Exhibit B of Ordinance No. 98-30, incorporated herein by reference, from state, county, and municipal ad valorem property taxes, excluding property taxes imposed by school districts, that would otherwise be levied on the qualifying business and service enterprises in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  100 percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
b.  80 percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
c.  60 percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; 
d.  40 percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; and 
e.  20 percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the last year. 
(2)  Other incentives that may be granted will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis by the Columbus Consolidated Government through the department of community and economic development and could include exemption from any or all of the following: 
a.  Building permit fees. 
b.  Sign permit fees. 
c.  Business license administrative fee. 
d.  Rezoning fees. 
e.  Engineering fees. 
f.  Other local fees authorized by council, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 3, 4-7-98) 
Editor's note— Exhibit B of Ord. No. 98-30, adopted April 7, 1998, has not been included within the Code, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 98-30, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10A-34. - Council to act as authorized agency of enterprise zone. 
The council is the authorized agency to act in all matters pertaining to the enterprise zone and reserves the power to grant the incentives listed in section 10A-3 above to qualifying businesses in accordance with the authorization powers granted local governments in the administration of the enterprise zone in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 4, 4-7-98) 
Sec. 10A-35. - Director of community and economic development to act as liaison. 
The council further directs and designates its director of community and economic development as liaison for communication with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; the Georgia Department of Industry, Trade, and Tourism; the business community; and all others to oversee enterprise zone activities and administration, and communications with qualified businesses, as outlined in Exhibit B of Ordinance No. 98-30, incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 5, 4-7-98) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 10A-33. 
Sec. 10A-36. - Administration and enforcement. 
The council has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter by way of resolution or as contained in Exhibit B of Ordinance No. 98-30, incorporated herein by reference, including but not limited to reports and data information from businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 6, 4-7-98) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 10A-33. 
Sec. 10A-37. - Contractual agreement with qualifying business. 
A qualifying business shall consent to enter into a contractual agreement that outlines the incentives offered to the business and a guideline for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement should the terms of the contract be violated by the target business. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 7, 4-7-98) 
Chapter 10B - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; floodplain ordinance, Ch. 11A; health and sanitation, Ch. 13; sewers, § 13-173 et seq.; water, § 13-351 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 17C; stormwater management, Ch. 17D; zoning, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10B-1—10B-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-18, adopted Feb. 15, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as Art. II, §§ 10B-31—10B-34, of this chapter was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10B-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to assist in the identification and protection of freshwater wetlands in Columbus/Muscogee County. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § A, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-32. - Definition of freshwater wetlands. 
"Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. Freshwater wetlands do not include any areas defined as "coastal marshlands" by the State Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § B, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-33. - Minimum protection criteria for wetlands. 
(a)  The natural resources study map depicting wetlands shall be updated in the Columbus Comprehensive Plan to reflect all wetlands over five acres according to the National Wetlands Inventory Map. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any building permits by the inspections and codes enforcement division, areas depicted as wetlands according to the aforementioned map will require coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetlands determination and possibly a section 404 permit. The Consolidated Government of Columbus Engineering Department shall compare the sites of the proposed projects to the wetlands map and if necessary refer developers to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, before issuing a report back to the inspections and codes enforcement division on approval of such projects. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § C, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-34. - Wetlands protected areas overlay district map. 
The official map shall be known as the "wetlands protected areas overlay district map" and is attached as part of this article (Map C) for information. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § C, 2-15-00) 
Editor's note— The wetlands protected areas overlay district map referenced in § 10B-34 above has not been included within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 10B-35—10B-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-19, adopted Feb. 15, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as Art. III, §§ 10B-51—10B-54, of this chapter was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10B-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to insure the protection of the groundwater supply in Columbus and Muscogee County. This can be achieved by: 
(1)  Protecting groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas. 
(2)  Protecting groundwater quality by limiting density of future development in recharge areas; and 
(3)  Protecting groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge areas shall have no adverse affect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § A, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-52. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are terminology used by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in developing the location maps of significant groundwater recharge areas and pollution susceptibility. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydro geologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/ 2-87-035. The term "DRASTIC" is an acronym derived from the seven hydro geologic parameters deemed most influential to pollution susceptibility. They are Depth to water, net Recharge, Aquifer media, Soil media, Topography, Impact of the vadose zone, and hydraulic Conductivity of the aquifer. To arrive at a "DRASTIC" Rating each factor is incorporated into a relative rating scheme that uses a combination of weights and ratings to produce a numerical value. The higher the score an area receives on the index the more vulnerable or susceptible the area is to groundwater pollution. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the "DRASTIC" methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium, and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge area means those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil types and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § B, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-53. - Minimum protection criteria for groundwater recharge areas. 
(a)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(b)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in size and if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in size. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 * 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
(c)  New homes served by septic tanks/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources "Manual For On-Site Sewage Management Systems." (DHR Table MT-1) 
(1)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. (DRASTIC Rating of 141 to 181) 
(2)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. (DRASTIC Rating of less than 141) 
(d)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitations as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources "Manual For On-Site Sewage Management Systems." (DHR Table MT-2) 
(1)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. (DRASTIC Rating of 141 to 181) 
(2)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. (DRASTIC Rating of less than 141) 
(e)  The Columbus Consolidated Government may exempt existing lots of record from the minimum lot size requirements of subsection (c) for homes and subsection (d) for mobile homes. 
(f)  If the Columbus Zoning Ordinance requires a larger lot size than that required by subsection (c) for homes or subsection (d) for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. 
(g)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Columbus Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR manual and minimum lot size requirements. 
(h)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(i)  The Columbus Consolidated Government having jurisdictional authority over all significant recharge areas within its boundaries shall adopt, implement, and enforce said ordinance meeting the minimum groundwater protection standards developed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and adopted as required environmental criteria by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § C, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-54. - Groundwater recharge protected areas overlay district map. 
The official map shall be known as the "groundwater recharge protected areas overlay district map" and is attached as part of this article (Map A). 
(Ord. No. 00-19, 2-15-00) 
Editor's note— The groundwater recharge protected areas overlay district map referenced in § 10B-54 above has not been included within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 10B-55—10B-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-20, adopted Feb. 15, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as Art. IV, §§ 10B-71—10B-74, of this chapter was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10B-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to insure the protection of the drinking water supply in Columbus and Muscogee County. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § A, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-72. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are terminology used by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in developing the minimum protection criteria for water supply watersheds. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. Specific buffer uses may be defined by local governments consistent with these criteria. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in these criteria. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems, and railroads or other utilities identified by local governments. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan means a land use plan prepared and adopted by local governments for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § A, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-73. - Minimum protection criteria for water supply watersheds. 
New hazardous waste facilities (as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.) within the jurisdictional boundary of Columbus/Muscogee County which are located within a seven-mile radius of the Lake Oliver water supply reservoir/water supply intake point shall be located and perform their operations on impermeable/impervious surfaces having a spill and leak collection system. This article specifically refers to facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts (10,000 pounds or more on any one day) listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § C, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 10B-74. - Water supply watershed protected areas overlay district map. 
The official map shall be known as the "water supply watershed protected areas overlay district map" and is attached as part of this article (Map B). 
(Ord. No. 00-20, 2-15-00) 
Editor's note— The water supply watershed protected areas overlay district map referenced in § 10B-74 above has not been included within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 10B-75—10B-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MANDATORY RESTRICTION OF OUTDOOR WATER USE 

Sec. 10B-91. - Mandatory restriction of outdoor water use for landscaping. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7, outdoor watering for the purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may only occur between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(f)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 10-64, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 10B-92. - Enforcement. 
All persons shall comply with water use restrictions as imposed by the Georgia Water Stewardship Law and any variances thereto. Any water use by any person contrary to the provisions of the restrictions imposed by the Georgia Water Stewardship Law and any variance thereto is a violation of this article. 
The Columbus Board of Water Commissioners shall be the enforcement authority for this article. Violators of this article shall be subject to the following schedule of administrative penalties, which said board shall have the right to change, modify or alter as it deems appropriate and necessary to enforce this Ordinance, to the extent that violations occur within a 12-month period: 
(1)  First violation. Written notice with a description left at the property where the violation occurred. 
(2)  Second violation. $25.00 administrative penalty added to the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third violation. $50.00 administrative penalty added to the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent violations. $100.00 administrative penalty added to the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred and service termination, plus applicable reconnection of service charges. 
(Ord. No. 10-64, § 2, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 10B-93. - Conflict. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 10-64, § 2, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 11 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Numbering of residences, buildings receiving fire calls, § 18-53. 
State Law reference— As to furnishing the water for the extinguishing of fires by canal companies, see Ga. Code, § 17-109; as to destruction of property to prevent an extension of fires, see § 88-401; as to fire control in forests, see § 43-206; as to abatement of rent on destruction by fire of rented property, see § 61-113; as to requirements for fire escapes in hotels, see §§ 52-205, 52-9902 and in school buildings, see § 32-2001, 32-2002, 32-2003. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Fire safety standards. 
(a)  Adopted. Those certain rules and regulations adopted by the safety fire commissioner as set forth in Chapter 92A-7 of the Georgia Code Annotated are hereby adopted as rules and regulations pertaining to certain buildings for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of said act. 
(b)  Enforcement—Generally. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the chief of the inspections and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  Same—Assistance. The fire marshal of Columbus, Georgia, shall assist the chief of the inspections and code enforcement division in the enforcement of these regulations, and he shall make inspections of existing buildings and structures and shall be responsible for investigating all cases of arson and other suspected incendiary fires. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day's violation of a provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 2-21-50, § 1; Ord. No. 82-27, §§ 1—4, 4-13-82; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83) 
Cross reference— In connection with the provisions of this article see also Art. IV of this chapter. Fire Prevention Code; fire precautions at airports, § 7-13; discharging firearms or fireworks on the streets of the city, § 14-21; tampering with fire alarm box, § 14-23. 
Sec. 11-2. - Local fire marshal—Submitting name for appointment. 
Some person shall be selected, and the name submitted to the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, as the city's recommendation for appointment as local fire marshal for the city. 
(Res. of 2-21-50, § 2) 
Sec. 11-3. - Same—Co-operation with officials. 
The local fire marshal for the city, when appointed, together with all other city officials, department heads, and employees shall lend their co-operation to the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, state fire marshal and his deputies or assistants, whenever called upon by him or them in the enforcement of the Georgia Safety Fire Law and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Res. of 2-21-50, § 3) 
Sec. 11-4. - Resolution, submitting copy to state safety fire commissioner. 
The city clerk shall forward a certified copy of the resolution from which this and the preceding three sections are derived to the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia. 
(Res. of 2-21-50, § 4) 
Sec. 11-5. - Ashes and combustible material, storage, removal, inspection of premises—Inside buildings. 
(a)  Ashes. No person shall be permitted to place within any building in the city ashes in any box, barrel or other wooden vessel or floor, unless the same is immediately removed from the building, and all owners or occupants of buildings in this city are required to allow the chief of the fire department or any officer or member of the police force to inspect their buildings to see if the above is complied with. 
(b)  Trash, combustible material. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place and let remain in any box, barrel or otherwise in any building, cellar, alleyway, or yard, within the fire limits, for a longer period of time than 18 hours, any loose straw, hay, paper, other combustible matter, and all owners or occupants of buildings or cellars within said limits are hereby required to have an open alleyway extending from one end of the cellar to the other and to permit the chief of the fire department or any member thereof designated by him or any officer or member of the police force, to inspect their buildings, cellars and premises to see whether or not the provisions of this section are being complied with. 
(Code 1914, §§ 393, 693) 
Cross reference— Prohibition against littering streets, § 18-15; sanitary regulations at airports, § 7-7. 
Sec. 11-6. - Same—Outside buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow combustible trash, such as boxes, loose straw, paper and any such like material to accumulate on the premises adjoining or near any building within the city. When any such accumulation of combustible material shall be found so as to endanger any building, it shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department or any member of the police force to direct the owner or occupant of such premises to remove the same, and if same shall not be done within a reasonable time, not to exceed three days, upon conviction in the recorder's court of such failure or refusal and of the fact of the existing of such unlawful and dangerous combustible material, such person so convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1914, § 741) 
Sec. 11-6.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 77-109, § 1, enacted Aug. 9, 1977, repealed, § 11-6.1, derived from Ord. No. 71-103, §§1—3, adopted May 18, 1971. Said section prohibited self-service motor fuel businesses as injurious and dangerous to the health and welfare of the residents of the city. 
Sec. 11-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, § 19, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted former § 11-7, which pertained to cause of fires, investigation into, and report, and which derived from § 394 of the 1914 Code. 
Sec. 11-7.1. - Fire district. 
The fire district for Columbus, Georgia, shall include the following areas, as defined herein: 
(a)  Beginning at the west line of Tenth Street and Front Avenue and continuing along Front Avenue in a northerly direction to the western intersection of Front Avenue and Fourteenth Street; thence one block easterly along Fourteenth Street to a point at the intersection of Broadway and Fourteenth Street; thence northerly along Broadway to the western intersection of Fifteenth Street and Broadway; thence easterly along the north side of Fifteenth Street to a point intersecting the western side of Sixth Avenue; thence southerly along the western line of Sixth Avenue to a point intersecting Tenth Street and Sixth Avenue, thence westerly along the south side of Tenth Street to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 91-87, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 10-61, § 1, 11-30-10) 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 8. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-56, adopted June 19, 2001, creates the Columbus Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services, consolidating within the new department the current Columbus Fire Department, Columbus Emergency Medical Service and the Department of Emergency Management; and amending the Position Classification Plan and Pay Plan of the Columbus Consolidated Government as specified on an organizational chart attached thereto and the listing of positions contained therein. It is noted on the ordinance that as said transition occurs, EMT-trained firefighters will be classified as firefighters, and paramedic-trained firefighters will be classified as fire medics. This ordinance became effective on July 1, 2001. A complete copy of this ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of council. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, §§ 1—10, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted in their entirety and replaced the provisions of div. 1, §§ 11-8—11-17, which pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 202—209, 774, and 776 of the 1914 Code. 

Sec. 11-8. - Department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(a)  Establishment. The department of fire and emergency medical services is established to respond to emergencies and non-emergencies within the legal boundaries of Columbus, Georgia. In addition, the department is authorized to respond to emergencies with those jurisdictions having a written mutual aid agreement with the department. 
(b)  Adopted. Those certain rules and regulations adopted periodically by the safety fire commissioner as set forth in Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated are hereby adopted as rules and regulations pertaining to certain buildings for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of said act. 
(c)  Enforcement—Generally. The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall enforce the provisions of this section. The Chief of the Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services of Columbus, Georgia, shall be responsible for facilitating the enforcement of these regulations. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances. Each day's violation of a provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 1, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-9. - Service area. 
The fire and emergency medical services service area for Columbus, Georgia, shall include the following areas, as defined herein: 
The jurisdiction for the department of fire and emergency medical services shall include all areas within the incorporated boundaries of Muscogee County, as defined in the Columbus Charter, Section 1-102. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 2, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-10. - Membership. 
Membership shall be composed of members of fire companies, emergency medical companies, training/special ops, logistics/support, administrative services, emergency management, fire prevention, and budget/procurement. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 3, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-11. - Chief—Appointment. 
The mayor shall nominate a candidate and, with approval of a majority vote of the Columbus Council, shall appoint the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services, as provided in the Columbus Charter. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 4, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-12. - Same—Duties—Generally. 
(a)  The chief of fire and emergency medical services shall be the chief executive officer of the department of fire and emergency medical services. The chief shall be responsible to the mayor for the overall operations of the department. The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services is the ranking officer of the department and shall have authority over all personnel, sworn and non-sworn, within the department. 
(b)  The chief shall be responsible for the selection, hiring, training, assignment, promotion and appointment of all personnel. The chief shall have the authority to discipline, including the termination of, any departmental personnel. 
(c)  The chief is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and to establish policies and guidelines governing the conduct of departmental employees and the activities and operations of the department of fire and emergency medical services. The chief is responsible for the fiscal management of the department and shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the mayor and city manager, as directed. 
(d)  The chief may delegate any of the responsibilities of the office to any of the subordinates with the department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(e)  The chief is authorized to assign personnel as needed to conduct emergency and non-emergency operations and to inspect buildings for compliance with the most current standard fire prevention code as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
(f)  The chief is authorized to assign personnel as needed for review of plans of fire suppression/detection systems, hydrant placement review, exit illumination and permit compliance for all areas within the responsibility of the Columbus Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 5, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-13. - Same—Control over equipment. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall have general control and supervision of all the equipment and of all the members of the department, and shall be responsible for the condition and efficiency of the same, and shall be in full command of all members of the department. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 6, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-14. - Assistant chief—Appointment. 
There shall be two assistant chiefs appointed pursuant to the provisions of section 11-17.13 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 7, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-15. - Equipment—Managed by department of fire and emergency medical services. 
The department of fire and emergency medical services shall be empowered to take charge and have the care and management of its equipment, vehicles, and other supplies for mitigating emergencies and non-emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 8, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-16. - Same—Tampering with, injuring. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly injure or damage, in any way, or by any means whatsoever, any equipment, vehicles, or other supplies used for mitigating emergencies and non-emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 9, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-17. - Fire hydrant, tampering with, authorized wrench, leaving valve open. 
(a)  An operational permit is required to use or operate fire hydrants or valves intended for fire suppression purposes which are installed on water systems and accessible to a fire apparatus access road that is open to or generally used by the public. Permits are obtained through the Columbus Water Works. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized officer or employee of the city, to open or attempt to open any fire hydrants owned or rented by the city without a permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants in any other manner than by the use of the regulation fire hydrant wrench. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or to leave a valve or hose connection open or in anyway damage any of such fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 10, 9-16-03) 
DIVISION 2. - PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, adopted December 6, 2016, amended Art. II, Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 11-17.1—11-17.18, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 02-104, § 1, 10-15-02; Ord. No. 03-32, § 1, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 03-57, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 03-71, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-10-04). 

Sec. 11-17.1. - Administrative responsibility. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, shall have administrative responsibility for all matters relating to the promotional procedures of the department, except as otherwise may be provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.2. - Use of external sources. 
In order to provide for an impartial implementation of this article, the city manager, upon approval of the Columbus Council, shall contract with, or otherwise arrange with, an examination administrator outside the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia to prepare and administer all written examinations and assessment centers. No member of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia shall serve as an evaluator in any assessment center conducted specifically to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be used to administer and interpret this division: 
(a)  Applicant: Employees who assert they are eligible for promotion to the rank of fire sergeant, fire lieutenant, fire captain, fire battalion chief in the department of fire and emergency medical services of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Appointed/provisional rank: Employee appointed to a specific rank by the chief in compliance with this division. Appointed ranks include fire prevention division chief, training division chief, fire prevention division chief, deputy chiefs and assistant chief. 
Non-Chief appointed provisional rank: assistant training officer (captain), fire prevention (captain), training instructors (lieutenant), fire prevention inspectors (lieutenant), fire prevention investigators (sergeant), logistics/support (sergeant), logistics/support (lieutenant), rescue coordinator (captain), EMS coordinator (captain), logistics/support (captain) and administrative captain. 
(c)  Candidate: Any participant whose name appears on the promotional roster established for the rank for which the employee is competing. 
(d)  Chief: The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(e)  Department: The department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(f)  Eligible: Any applicant certified in writing by the chief to participate in the applicable promotional procedure. 
(g)  Eligibility date: The date from which an employee's time in service or time in rank requirement is calculated. October 15, 2015 shall be the eligibility date set at subsequent 24-month intervals. The examination date for each position shall be determined by the examination administrator. The written test may occur prior to the eligibility date. 
(h)  Examination administrator: An agent outside of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia contracted to prepare and administer written examinations and assessment centers. 
(i)  Fire apparatus: Any engine truck, ladder truck or squad truck. 
(j)  Fire officer: The ranks of fire lieutenant, fire captain, and fire battalion chief. 
(k)  Participant: Any employee who, upon being certified as eligible by the chief, actually engages in any or all of the promotional procedures for the rank for which the employee has been certified as eligible. 
(l)  Permanent rank: Employee who was promoted from the promotional eligibility roster and has successfully completed the probationary period of 18 months. 
(m)  Proficiency for fire apparatus operations (PFAO): Performance-based examination administered by the Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services Training Division. Once a candidate successfully completes the Proficiency for Fire Apparatus Operations test, the candidate will not be required to retake the Proficiency for Fire Apparatus Operations test, provided the candidate maintains the appropriate annual apparatus proficiency certification. The PFAO may be administered at any time prior to the announcement of the promotional cycle. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.4. - General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the department to select only from among the best qualified employees for appointments and promotions to positions of greater responsibility. Concurrently, it shall be the policy of the department to administer promotional procedures which yield valid and reliable information on which to base promotional decisions and to insure rigorous and fair competition among all employees eligible for promotion. 
(b)  Separate eligibility requirements, promotional procedures, promotional rosters, and other provisions relating to the ranks of fire sergeant, fire lieutenant, fire captain and fire battalion chief are specified herein. Policy shall be promulgated by affected departments of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia to implement the provisions and intent of this or related enactments. 
(c)  Each promotional rank contained herein shall have a separate promotional roster. Promotional rosters shall expire on December 31st at 2400 hours with subsequent establishment and expiration dates at 24-month intervals thereafter. As such, each promotional roster established on or after January 1, 2016, shall have an initial duration life of 24 months from the date on which it is established. 
(d)  The chief shall fill each promotional vacancy within 30 calendar days from a valid promotional roster; provided, however, that if a vacancy occurs within the last 30 calendar days of the life of a promotional roster, such vacancy or vacancies shall be filled before the promotional roster can lapse. If a vacancy occurs after the expiration of a roster and before the establishment of a new roster, that vacancy shall be filled within 15 working days after the new roster is established. 
(e)  Written examinations and examination scoring keys will not be released, except as may be otherwise legally required. Participants desiring to appeal particular items on the written test must do so at the time of the testing session using the procedures specified by the examination administrator. Upon completion of all phases of the promotional process, each participant will be provided with his/her test score and a rank so as to allow the participant to determine where he/she fell in that ranking. A participant desiring to challenge his/her score must make a written protest within five days of receiving his/her examination score. The vendor shall respond in writing within 15 days of the receipt of a written protest as to its disposition. Only those participants who pass the written examination will be allowed to proceed to the next promotional process. The passing score (or method for determining the passing score) for the written examination shall be specified on the posting announcing the promotional procedure. 
(f)  With respect to the performance-based assessment results, candidates who personally participated will receive their own scores and may make protests and receive responses as provided for in section 11-17.4(e) above. 
(g)  All promotions shall be probationary and no employee shall be permanently assigned to a rank until an 18-month probation period is satisfactorily completed. Such probationary period may be extended six months in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia. During either the original term or an extension of a probationary period, the chief may return a candidate to his/her previous rank for cause. 
(h)  Any candidate who declines a promotion shall do so in writing. Said written declination shall be submitted to the chief and director of human resources within seven days of the promotion offer. Any candidate declining a promotion offer shall be eliminated from further consideration for the duration of the promotional roster on which the candidate's name appears. 
(i)  Eligibles shall be responsible for providing documentation verifying their claims to educational certification. 
(j)  Other appeals: The right of an employee to challenge any aspect of the administration of the promotional procedure which has a direct impact upon his/her promotability is fundamental to any equitable system. Appeals not specifically provided for elsewhere in this division may be made and shall be disposed of in the manner described in section 11-17.4(e); provided, however, the selection of an individual(s) for promotion shall not be subject to such appeal process. 
(k)  Availability of source material: No announcement of the beginning of a fire sergeant's, fire lieutenant's, or fire captain's promotional procedure can be made until sufficient source materials from which written examination questions are to be drawn are available for eligible candidates. The department shall confirm that source material may be purchased from the publisher or another source and internal documents are available within the department. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.5. - Eligibility for promotions. 
(a)  Computation of service: For purposes of computation of service, all employees must meet the required time in rank or time in service (however stipulated below) as of the eligibility date established in 11-17.3(g). Further, time in rank or time in service requirements refer to continuous full-time service in the Columbus, Georgia Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services. 
(b)  For promotion to fire sergeant: To be eligible to participate in the promotional procedure for fire sergeant, the employee must hold: 
(1)  Hold a paramedic certification and/or an associate's degree (or equivalent two-year degree Ord. 06-87 Sec. 8(c)) and a total of three continuous years of service or, 
(2)  Four additional years for a total of seven continuous years of service and 
(3)  A Firefighter/EMT-I, Firefighter/AEMT or Firemedic certification and 
(4)  Successfully complete the Proficiency in Fire Apparatus Operations Test administered by the department's division of fire training. 
(5)  The requirements described in (b)(3) shall not apply to those personnel that are within five years of their normal retirement date. 
(c)  For promotion to fire lieutenant: To be eligible to participate, all candidates must: 
(1)  Hold an associate's degree (or equivalent two-year degree) or have a service date prior to September 16, 2010 and 
(2)  A total of two continuous years serving as a fire sergeant. 
(3)  Be at a minimum certified as an EMT by the 2015 promotional testing cycle 
(4)  The requirements described in subsection (c)(3) shall not apply to those personnel that are within five years of their normal retirement date. 
(d)  For promotion to fire captain: To be eligible to participate, all candidates must: 
(1)  Hold an associate's degree (or equivalent two-year degree) or have a service date prior to September 16, 2010 and 
(2)  A total of two continuous years serving as a fire lieutenant 
(3)  Be at a minimum certified as an EMT by the 2015 promotional testing cycle 
(4)  The requirements described in subsection (d)(3) shall not apply to those personnel that are within five years of their normal retirement date. 
(e)  For promotion to fire battalion chief: To be eligible to participate, all candidates must: 
(1)  Hold an associate's degree (or equivalent two-year degree) or have a service date prior to September 16, 2010 and 
(2)  A total of two continuous years serving as a fire captain. 
(3)  be at a minimum certified as an EMT by the 2015 promotional testing cycle 
(4)  The requirements described in subsection (e)(3) shall not apply to those personnel that are within five years of their normal retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 17-14, § 1, 3-28-17; Ord. No. 17-14(2), § 1, 3-28-17) 
Sec. 11-17.6. - Promotional procedures for fire sergeant, fire lieutenant, fire captain and fire battalion chief. 
(a)  The promotional procedures for fire sergeant, fire lieutenant and fire captain, shall consist of a two phase process. Phase I shall be a written test, as described in paragraph (d) below. Phase II shall be a performance-based assessment, as described in paragraph (e) below. The promotional procedures for fire battalion chief shall consist of a performance-based assessment, as described in paragraph (e) below. 
(b)  Reading list. At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the written examination, the chief shall announce in writing the material from which the questions on the written test are to be drawn including the sources. 
(c)  Certification of eligibility. The position announcement shall be distributed in writing by the chief at least 45 days prior to the administration of the promotional procedures. The position announcement shall state the passing point or the method to determine the passing point. Said passing point or method of passing point determination shall be set by the chief, human resources director and the public safety director in consultation with the examination administrator. At the end of the 14 calendar days following such announcement, the application period shall be deemed closed without exception and within another 14 calendar days, the chief shall certify in writing the list of those eligible to participate. 
(d)  Written test (Phase I). A multiple-choice written examination, based on the results of a current job-task analysis, shall be administered. After candidates complete the written test, a copy will be made of the answer sheet, and given to the candidate to self-grade (unofficial score). Final written examination scores will not be released to participants until all appeals and any appropriate adjustments have been determined and all test phases of the promotional process have been completed. Any adjustments arising out of any analysis of the test shall be specified in a written report and shall be provided to the chief and the director of human resources. Only those participants who successfully complete and pass the written examination will be allowed to proceed to Phase II (performance-based assessment) of the promotional process. 
(e)  Performance-based assessment (Phase II). A performance-based assessment, based on the results of a current job-task analysis, shall be administered. The performance-based assessment shall consist of multiple exercises such as oral presentation, role-playing, incident command, in-basket task, situational judgment, or other job-related exercises. Performance examination scores will not be released to participants until all appeals and any appropriate adjustments have been determined. Any adjustments arising out of any analysis of the test shall be specified in a written report and shall be provided to the chief and the director of human resources. Only those participants who successfully complete and pass the performance-based examination will be considered for eligibility for promotion. 
(f)  Final examination scores for those candidates successfully completing all phases of the promotional process shall be calculated. Final scores shall be calculated according to the component (i.e., phase one and phase two) weights specified by a test plan derived from a current job-task analysis. Said component weights shall be stated on the posting announcing the promotional procedure as specified by the examination administrator. 
(g)  Banding procedures—Rule of five. 
(1)  The chief shall receive a list (band) with the top five candidates (plus ties) on the eligible roster. 
(2)  The chief may select from any of the candidates in the band to fill vacancies. The chief may, at his/her discretion, use a strict rank-order or other process to fill vacancies, provided that vacancies are filled from the band until exhausted. Regardless of the specific procedures used by the chief to select from the band, the rule of five shall be exercised when providing the chief with a list from which to fill vacancies. 
(3)  Upon promoting all five candidates (plus ties) in the band, the chief shall receive the next band with the next top five candidates (plus ties). The selection process will then be repeated. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.7. - Promotional decisions. 
The chief shall promote candidates as provided in section 11-17.6(g). The chief may consider the examination scores on each participant, as well as other job-related matters including, but not limited to seniority, education, performance evaluations, disciplinary actions, commendations and examination/performance-based assessment scores. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.8. - Appointed ranks. 
Personnel who hold an appointed provisional rank, including logistics, administration, fire prevention and training appointees, shall, upon their reassignment to the operations division, revert to the rank they held prior to receiving their appointed rank. Personnel holding positions of appointed rank that elect to participate in the promotional process and are promoted from a promotional roster shall hold that promoted rank upon their reassignment to the operations division. Personnel holding an appointed provisional rank shall only be eligible to compete for the next higher position held prior to their provisional appointment. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.9. - Effect of disciplinary action. 
(a)  Candidates who are suspended without pay for five days shall be removed from the current promotional roster for the life of that roster. 
(b)  Eligibles suspended without pay for ten days, 24 months prior to the October 15th eligibility date shall not be allowed to participate in the promotional process. 
(c)  Candidates deemed ineligible (suspended without pay for five days) during the testing process shall be removed from the process and no scores shall be calculated or provided. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.10. - Effect of promotion during the testing process. 
A candidate who is participating in a promotional process and is promoted to the rank for which he/she is competing prior to the establishment of the new eligible roster, shall be deemed ineligible for purposes of score or rank calculation. Further, no scores shall be calculated or provided for said candidate. If said promotion occurs during the administration of the promotion process, said candidate will not be allowed to continue in the process. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.11. - Record-keeping requirements. 
All examination scores, files, records, administrative directives and promotional results shall be stored in a secured area by the department of fire and emergency medical services for a minimum of four years following the publication of the promotional roster for each separate promotional procedure. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.12. - Annual review. 
The department of fire and emergency medical services professional standards committee, shall annually review, evaluate and report to the fire and emergency medical services chief in writing as to the administration of the promotional procedures and recommend changes as may be warranted. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.13. - Position of assistant chief. 
(a)  The position of assistant chief is an appointed rank. Said appointment is to be made by the chief. 
(b)  The position of assistant chief shall be pay grade 24. 
(c)  To be eligible for the position of assistant chief, a candidate must have held the appointed or promoted rank of battalion chief, division chief or deputy chief for two years. A baccalaureate degree is required. A master's degree is preferred but not required for this position. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.14. - Position of deputy chief. 
(a)  The position of deputy chief is an appointed rank. Said appointment is to be made by the chief. 
(b)  The position of deputy chief shall be pay grade 23. 
(c)  To be eligible for the position of deputy chief, a candidate must have been appointed or promoted to the rank of battalion chief or division chief or held the permanent rank of fire captain for a minimum of two years. An Associate's degree is required. A baccalaureate degree is preferred, but not required for this position. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.15. - Position of division chief. 
(a)  The position of division chief includes the ranks of administrative division chief, fire marshal division chief, and training division chief. The position of division chief is an appointed rank. Said appointment shall be made by the chief. 
(b)  The position of division chief shall be pay grade 22. 
(c)  To be eligible for the position of division chief, a candidate must have held the permanent rank of fire captain for a minimum of two years. An associate's degree (or equivalent two-year degree) is required 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.16. - Non-chief appointed positions. 
(a)  Non-chief appointed positions include the positions of assistant training officer (captain), assistant fire marshal (captain), training instructors, fire prevention inspectors, fire prevention investigators, logistics/support sergeant, logistics/support lieutenant, rescue coordinator (captain), EMS coordinator (captain), logistics captain and administrative captain. 
(b)  Any appointee who fails to perform the duties of one of these ranks satisfactorily may at any time be reverted to their former permanent rank at the discretion of the chief. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 11-17.17. - Certification 
(a)  All sworn personnel who have obtained State of Georgia firefighter certification will be required to maintain State of Georgia firefighter certification. 
(b)  All sworn personnel who have obtained State of Georgia Emergency Medical—Technician, Intermediate, Advanced or Paramedic certification will be required to maintain State of Georgia Emergency Medical—Technician, Intermediate, Advanced or Paramedic certification. 
(Ord. No. 16-49, § 1, 12-6-16) 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 11-18. - Storage, use or handling of inflammable substances, permits required. 
Except as specified in the following section, a permit, which shall be for one or more of the classes in the quantities stipulated in the following subsections, shall be obtained: 
(a)  For the storage or handling of a total quantity of Class 1 liquids in excess of one gallon in any dwelling, apartment house or tenement; and in excess of five gallons in any other building; and in excess of ten gallons outside of any building; and then only if kept in self-closing metal cans or tanks made for the purpose and free from leaks; and provided further, no cans shall be filled inside the building. 
(b)  For the storage or handling of a total quantity of Class 2 liquids in excess of five gallons in a dwelling, apartment house or tenement; and in excess of ten gallons in any other building; and in excess of 25 gallons outside of any building, and then only if kept in self-closing metal cans or tanks made for the purpose, and free from leaks; and provided further, no cans shall be filled inside the building. 
(c)  For the storage or handling of a total quantity of Class 3 liquids in excess of 25 gallons inside any building and in excess of 55 gallons outside of any building, and then only if kept in self-closing metal cans or tanks made for the purpose. 
(d)  (1)  For the storage, sale or handling of wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture, a permit shall be applied for at the Fire Prevention Division. An annual permit fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the Fire Prevention Division upon application. 
(2)  The Chief or his designee in the Fire Prevention Division shall act upon the application for permit within 30 days of submission and if no action is taken by the Chief or his designee within 30 days of submission, the application shall be deemed approved. Permits shall be kept on the premises of any permanent structure where items listed in subsection (d)(1) are stored, sold or handled. For vendors not located in a permanent structure, permits shall be kept on the person conducting sales of items listed in subsection (d)(1). 
(3)  Any person violating any provision of this subsection (d) shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. of 9-3-19 § 3; Ord. No. 05-45, § 1, 6-11-05) 
Sec. 11-19. - Same—Conditions where permit not required. 
Unless storage of quantities in excess of those given in the preceding section is to be maintained for at least 30 days, nothing in such section shall require an owner or occupant, or his agent, to obtain a permit for the use of, nor does it prohibit the use by him of, paints, oils, varnishes, and similar inflammable liquids. 
(Ord. of 9-3-19, § 3) 
Sec. 11-20. - Same—Application, information required, vehicles to which provisions not applicable. 
Application for a permit shall be made to the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services in writing and shall state the location of the building and the quantity of gasoline, benzene, benzol, naphtha, or other flammable and combustible liquids which the applicant desires to keep in storage or for sale; provided, however, no provision in this chapter is intended to prohibit the carrying of gasoline or diesel in the storage tanks of automobiles or other gasoline or diesel-driven vehicles. 
(Ord. of 9-13-19, § 3; Ord. No. 03-76, § 11, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-20.1. - Hazardous materials permits. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section : 
(1)  Extremely hazardous material means any hazardous waste or mixture of hazardous wastes which, if human exposure should occur, may likely result in death, disabling personal injury or serious illness caused by hazardous waste because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical characteristics. 
(2)  Hazardous materials means any substance which is defined as a hazardous material by Title III, section 302-312 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, known as the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act. 
(3)  Facilities list means the list of Muscogee County sites at which hazardous materials are used or stored, which list is published from time to time by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(4)  Governmental site means any site under the direct control of the Consolidated Government of Columbus or another state or local governmental agency. 
(5)  MSDS means Materials Safety Data Sheet. 
(b)  Permit required: fire department to notify. 
(1)  Department of fire and emergency medical services is to notify any person, firm or corporation which is located at or operates any site appearing on the facilities list and/or stores materials 10,000 pounds or greater that require an MSDS to be maintained at the workplace and/or stores materials classified as an extremely hazardous material 500 pounds or greater shall obtain a hazardous materials permit from the department of fire and emergency medical services. The hazardous materials permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance, and shall be posted prominently at the site appearing or the facilities list. 
(2)  The department of fire and emergency medical services shall be responsible for notifying each person, firm or corporation subject to the requirements of this section of its obligation, and no person, firm, or corporation shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section unless so notified. 
(c)  Permit fee. 
(1)  No permit required by this section shall be issued unless the person, firm, or corporation which is located at or operates the site has first paid the revenue division of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, a permit fee of $50.00 for each material requiring a MSDS stored at the facility not to exceed $500.00 provided, however, that no permit fee shall be charged for any governmental site. Any person, firm, or corporation notified by the department of fire and emergency medical services of its obligation pursuant to this section shall pay the permit fee to the revenue division of the Columbus Consolidated Government within 30 days of the date of such notifications, and shall be issued a hazardous materials permit by the department of fire and emergency medical services within 30 days thereafter. 
(2)  The fire and EMS department shall provide all permit fees to the city treasury within two business days of receipt. 
(d)  Inspections. 
(1)  Each site appearing on the facilities list shall be inspected at least once each calendar year by the department of fire and emergency medical services for the conformance with the fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 92-36, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 03-45, § 2, 6-10-03) 
Editor's note— In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions of Ord. No. 92-36, designated as § 11-20, have been included as § 11-20.1 by the editor. 
Sec. 11-20.2. - Blasting with explosives; notice to neighbors. 
Any person or entity conducting blasting with explosives, as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 25-8-2, pursuant to a permit issued by the department of fire and emergency medical services or any state or federal authority, shall be responsible for sending written notice to residents and businesses within 450 feet (Urban Service District One) and 1,000 feet (Urban Service District Two) of a blast site. As used herein, "blast site" shall have the same definition as that contained in the 2000 Standard Fire Prevention Code. Such notice shall be mailed or hand-delivered at least three business days prior to any blasting activity by a permittee. In case of emergency, as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 25-9-3, the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services or his designee may waive the three-day notice requirement. 
(Ord. No. 02-65, § 1, 6-27-02) 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Art. IV, §§ 11-21 through 11-28, is derived from Ord. No. 57-142 enacted on September 17, 1957 and effective on October 18, 1957. As said ordinance did not amend this Code it has been codified as said article and sections at the discretion of the editors. The severability and effective date clauses of Ord. 57-142 have been omitted. The ordinance contained no repealing clause. 

Sec. 11-21. - Fire prevention. 
(a)  The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall appoint a fire marshal/division chief of the fire prevention division. 
(b)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing hazardous conditions from fire or explosion in Columbus, Georgia, the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia, including State of Georgia amendments, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted or amended. 
(c)  Applicability. The most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia is adopted and incorporated into the Columbus Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the geographical limits of Columbus, Georgia. The council also adopts any subsequent edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(d)  Copies on file. A copy of the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia and any subsequent edition shall be kept in the office of the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services and such code constitutes a public record, copies of any portion or the whole of which shall be made on request for members of the public upon payment of reasonable costs of copying. 
(e)  Scope. This code establishes regulations affecting or relating to existing structures, processes and premises and safeguards from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises from fire hazards in the structure or on the premise from occupancy or operation: and, matters related to the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems. 
(f)  Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures and premises. 
(g)  Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(h)  Validity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions hereof, which are determined to be legal; and it shall be presumed that this code would have been passed without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions. 
(i)  Administrative operational and maintenance provisions: The administrative, operational and maintenance provisions of this code shall apply to: 
(1)  Conditions and operations arising after the adoptions of this code; and 
(2)  Existing conditions and operations. 
(j)  Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 45 of the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
(k)  Subjects not regulated by this code. Where no applicable standards or requirements are set forth in this code, or are contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction, compliance with applicable standards of the National Fire Protection Association or other nationally recognized fire safety standards as are approved shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent of this code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the chief of fire and emergency medical services' official to determine compliance with codes or standards for those activities or installations within the fire and emergency medical services' official jurisdiction or responsibility. 
(l)  Matters not provided for. Requirements that are essential for the public safety of an existing or proposed activity, building or structure, or for the safety of the occupants thereof, which are not specifically provided for by this code shall be determined by the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services or designee. 
(m)  Conflicting provisions. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(n)  General. The fire prevention division is established within the jurisdiction under the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services. The function of the division shall be the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this code as they pertain to the responsibilities of the department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(o)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the chief of fire and emergency medical services shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modifications does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the fire prevention division. 
(p)  Fire investigations. The department of fire and emergency medical services shall have the authority to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire or other hazardous condition. Information that could be related to trade secrets or processes shall not be made part of the public record except as directed by a court of law. 
(q)  Assistance from other agencies. Law enforcement and other enforcement agencies shall render necessary assistance in the investigation of fires when requested to do so. 
(r)  Authority at fires and other emergencies. The officer of the department of fire and emergency medical services in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life, property or the environment or any part thereof, shall have the authority to direct such operation as necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations, or take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. In the exercise of such power, the officer is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene and is authorized to remove or cause to be removed or kept away from the scene, any vehicle, vessel or thing which could impede or interfere with the operations of the department and, in the judgment of the chief or officer, any person not actually and usefully employed in the extinguishing of such fire or in the preservation of property and the environment in the vicinity thereof. 
(s)  Obstructing operations. No person shall obstruct the operations of the department in connection with extinguishment or control of any fire, or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the chief or officer of the department in charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a law enforcement officer assisting the department of fire and emergency medical services. 
(t)  Systems and devices. No person shall render a system or device inoperative during an emergency unless by direction of the chief or department official in charge of the incident. 
(u)  Enforcement. The Chief of the Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services of Columbus, Georgia, shall be responsible for facilitating the enforcement of these regulations as they pertain to emergencies and the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia, as it applies to existing buildings and fire alarm notification systems, hydrant placement review, and or fire suppression systems in new construction, and shall make inspections of existing buildings identified in the Georgia Fire Laws and Regulations Annotated and shall be responsible for investigating all fires for cause and origin. 
(v)  The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services may designate such members of the department of fire and emergency medical services as inspectors and investigators for the purpose of otherwise enforcing the Fire Prevention Code, as shall be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 57-142, § 1; Ord. No. 65-32, 3-29-65; Ord. No. 65-150, 10-18-65; Ord. No. 71-165, § 1, 6-15-71; Ord. No. 82-40, § 1, 6-8-82; Ord. No. 91-108, § 1, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 03-76, § 12, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, § 19, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted former § 11-22, which pertained to enforcement, and derived from Ord. No. 57-142, § 2, and Ord. No. 71-165, § 2, adopted June 15, 1971. 
Sec. 11-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 91-108, adopted Nov. 26, 1991, repealed former § 11-23, which pertained to definitions as derived from Ord. No. 57-142, § 3, Ord. No. 71-165, § 3, adopted June 15, 1971. 
Sec. 11-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, § 19, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted former § 11-24, which pertained to amendments, and derived from Ord. No. 57-142, § 4, Ord. No. 71-165, § 4, adopted June 15, 1971, and Ord. No. 91-108, § 5, adopted November 26, 1991. 
Sec. 11-25. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services or the chief's designee shall disapprove in application or refuse to grant a permit, the applicant may appeal from the decision to the Columbus Council if such appeal is filed in writing with the clerk of council within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 57-142, § 5; Ord. No. 71-165, § 5, 6-15-71; Ord. No. 03-76, § 13, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-26. - Conflict with building code. 
It is the intent hereof that in the event of any conflict with the provisions of this article and of the provisions of the building code for Columbus, that such building code provisions shall prevail and the same are not repealed hereby. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 14, 9-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, § 14, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted and replaced former § 11-26, which pertained to new materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits, and derived from Ord. No. 57-142, § 6, and Ord. No. 71-165, § 2, adopted June 15, 1971. 
Sec. 11-27. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Council of Columbus or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall be punished by said court as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or allow the violation to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a period of ten days or such other time period specified by the recorder or a judge having jurisdiction of the offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a fire lane designated and marked in accordance with the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia; violators shall be fined a minimum of $200.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 57-142, § 7; Ord. No. 71-165, § 7, 6-15-71; Ord. No. 91-15, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 95-60, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 03-76, § 15, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 06-21, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 11-28. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services is authorized to revoke a permit issued by the department under the provisions of the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia or other applicable standard when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited to any one of the following: 
(1)  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. 
(2)  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. 
(3)  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have not been adhered to. 
(4)  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. 
(5)  The permit used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued. 
(6)  The permits failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia within the time provided therein. 
(7)  The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance or regulation of the most current Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  In all cases of revocation, the applicant shall be granted a hearing by the Chief of the Columbus Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services within seven days of the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 16, 9-16-03) 
Secs. 11-29—11-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-76, § 17, adopted September 16, 2003, deleted former art. V, §§ 11-41—11-43, which pertained to the emergency medical services department, and enacted a new art. V, § 11-29, pertaining to the emergency management director. This provision has been renumbered as § 11-41, to preserve the style of the Code, at the editor's discretion. Former §§ 11-41—11-43 derived from Ord. No. 86-10, §§ 1—3, adopted February 4, 1986, and Ord. No. 86-22, adopted March 18, 1986. 

Sec. 11-41. - Duties. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency medical services shall have an emergency management deputy director who shall coordinate with the following staffs and operating agencies within the consolidated government to insure that the following duties and responsibilities are adequately met: 

 
(Ord. No. 03-76, § 17, 9-16-03) 
Secs. 11-42—11-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-24, § 1, enacted Mar. 10, 1987, changed the name of the civil defense department to "department of emergency management," and changed references to such department accordingly throughout this article. 
Ordinance No. 03-76, § 18, enacted September 16, 2003, removed and renumbered former ch. 2, art. II, §§ 2-19—2-23, pertaining to the department of emergency management, to ch. 11, art. VI, §§ 11-46—11-51, as set forth herein. 
Note— See the editor's note to Ch. 11, Art. II. 

Sec. 11-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 11-46 (formerly § 2-19), creating the civil defense department was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said section was derived from Ord. No. 58-22, § 1, enacted March 25, 1958. 
Sec. 11-47. - Director—Appointment. 
The department of emergency management shall be under the direction and control of an emergency management director who shall be an employee of the City of Columbus, but which director shall be appointed by the Governor of the State of Georgia upon nomination by this commission. 
(Ord. No. 58-22, § 2, 3-25-58; Ord. No. 87-24, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 03-76, § 18, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-48. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The emergency management director, subject to the provisions of section 11-50 is hereby authorized and directed: 
(a)  To represent the City of Columbus in all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(b)  To prepare or cause to be prepared necessary emergency management plans which will be adequate and effective in any emergency management emergency and to implement such plans in any such emergency. 
(c)  Subject to specific direction of this commission, to call on all city employees for assistance and cooperation in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans and training. 
(d)  To insure the necessary coordination with the state director of emergency management, with the directors of other probably target areas within the state, and with the emergency management authorities of neighboring communities. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  To designate as public shelters all those areas which provide reasonable protection against fallout radiation, and which have a capacity of not less than 20, to prepare suitable plans and to issue necessary instructions and directives for the proper utilization and control of all such public shelters; and, in time of emergency, to assume full control over such public shelters, whether or not the building owner or lessee shall have executed any license or permit for its use as a public shelter. 
(g)  To appoint and to remove shelter managers and alternate shelter managers for all public shelters. 
(Ord. No. 58-22, § 4, 3-25-58; Ord. No. 63-16, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-63; Ord. No. 87-24, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 92-3, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 03-76, § 18, 9-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-16, §§ 1 and 2 amended Ord. No. 58-22, § 4, from which § 11-48 (formerly § 2-21) is derived, and added subsections (f) and (g). 
Sec. 11-49. - General powers, duties, of shelter managers and assistant managers. 
Shelter managers and alternate shelter managers appointed under the provisions of 11-48(g) above shall act during the emergency as agents of the emergency management director. During the period of shelter occupancy they shall have full authority to carry out all instructions and directives of the emergency management director, to establish and enforce necessary rules and regulations for the shelter, and to take such other action as may be necessary for the protection and well-being of the shelter occupants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any instruction or directive of any law enforcement officer, the emergency management director, shelter managers, or alternate shelter managers during time of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 63-16, § 3, 3-4-63; Ord. No. 87-24, § 2, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 93-15, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 03-76, § 18, 9-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-16, § 3 amended Ord. No. 58-22, from which this article is derived, to add a new § 6. The editors have codified said new section as § 2-21.1 [now § 11-49] above. 
Sec. 11-50. - Director responsible to mayor; department governed by Charter and Georgia Civil Defense Act. 
The emergency management director shall report and be responsible to the mayor, and the activities of such emergency management director and of such department of emergency management shall be governed by existing charter provisions of the city and by the provisions of the Georgia Civil Defense Act of 1951, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 58-22, § 3, 3-25-58; Ord. No. 87-24, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 03-76, § 18, 9-16-03) 
Sec. 11-51. - Emergency management director to serve as director of emergency planning. 
The emergency management director shall serve also as the director of emergency planning for the city. In this capacity he is responsible, subject to the provisions of section 11-50 above, for all emergency planning, all emergency organizations, all emergency operations, including those measures which might be required for the management of resources and economic stabilization in the event of enemy attack. 
(Ord. No. 62-47, § 1, 5-28-62; Ord. No. 87-24, § 2, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 03-76, § 18, 9-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 62-47, § 1, amended Ord. No. 58-22, codified as §§ 2-19—2-22, by adding section 5 thereto. The editors have designated said section as § 2-23 [now § 11-51]. 
Chapter 11B - FLEA MARKETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-159, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1987, amended the Code by adding a new chapter thereto. Codification of the provisions of the ordinance as Ch. 11B, to read as set out herein was at the editor's discretion, inasmuch as there already existed a Ch. 11A. 
Cross reference— Bazaar markets, Ch, 7A; buildings, Ch. 8; dealers in secondhand jewelry, precious metals and gems, Ch. 10; fire protection, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; taxation and licenses, Ch. 19; traffic, Ch. 20; tree planting and protection, Ch. 21, zoning, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11B-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Flea Market Ordinance for Columbus, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 101, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-2. - Purpose; function. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of Columbus, Georgia, by regulating the location, design and maintenance of flea markets. 
(b)  This chapter establishes minimum standards for flea markets. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, §§ 102, 103, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. Unless the context of this chapter requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and administration of the chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include "arranged", "designed", "constructed", "altered", "converted", "rented", "leased", or "intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Accessory Structure. Any structural addition which includes awnings, cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets, and similar appurtenant structures. 
Building. A roofed structure erected for permanent use. 
Building inspector. The director of the inspections and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia. 
Booth. A structure constructed for the purpose of displaying and selling merchandise. 
Common area. Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying flea markets. 
Density. The number of flea market booths per gross acre. 
Easement. A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than that of the owner who holds title to the land. 
Enforcing agency. The director of the inspections and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia, charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Flea market. An activity where stalls or spaces within the bounds of a specific location are made available to the vendor of handicraft items or the vendors of new merchandise where each new item does not have a price in excess of $50.00 or to vendors of secondhand items; all such vendors may not be manufacturers or the holders of any other retail license for the sale of similar merchandise. 
Flea market stand. That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of flea market booths, appurtenant structures or additions. 
Governing body. The council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Lot line. The line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan. 
Market management. The person who owns or has charge, care or control of the flea market. 
Permit. A written document issued by the inspections and code enforcement division allowing a person to locate a flea market or to construct, alter or extend a flea market under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity. 
Private street. A private way which affords principal means or access to individual flea market stands and auxiliary buildings. 
Public street. A private way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Rights-of-way. The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists. 
Service building. A structure housing sanitary, operational, office, recreational, maintenance and other facilities built to conform to required standards. 
Sewer connection. Pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the flea market stand and the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewer system serving the flea market. 
Sewer riser pipe. That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each flea market stand. 
Water connection. All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the flea market. 
Water riser pipe. The water riser pipe is that portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each flea market stand. 
Water service pipe. The water service pipe consists of all pipes, fittings, values and appurtenances from the water main of the flea market distribution system to the water outlet of the distribution system within the flea market stand. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, §§ 201, 202, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-4. - Variances. 
Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship, the planning division may authorize a variance, if such variance can be made without destroying the intent of these regulations. In granting variances, the planning division may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards of requirements so varied. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 604, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-5. - Conflict of ordinances; effect of partial invalidity. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the municipality, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 602, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-6. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 601, 11-17-87) 
Secs. 11B-7—11B-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 11B-21. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a flea market or to construct, alter or extend any flea market within the limits of the city, unless he holds a valid permit issued by the inspections and code enforcement division. Construction must begin within 180 days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 301, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-22. - Applications. 
All applications for permits for flea markets shall be submitted to the inspections and code enforcement division, after submission and approval of the final site plan by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 302, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-23. - Flea market site plan layout; approval. 
(a)  Generally; required information. A flea market site plan layout shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch and shall show the following information. 
(1)  Five black or blue line prints of the final site plan or before the first working day of the month shall be submitted to the planning division and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors. 
b.  Name and address of owner of land. 
c.  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the flea market. 
d.  Scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
e.  North arrow. 
f.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
g.  The number, location and size of all flea market stands. 
h.  The location, width and area of roadways, parkways, streets, driveways and walks. 
i.  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
j.  Location and design of parking spaces. 
k.  Gross density. 
(2)  Review and comment of the flea market site plan layout shall be noted in a report of the planning division and on all five prints as submitted. 
(3)  Approval of the final site plan shall be noted on all five prints and attested to by the signature of the director of the planning division. Three prints shall be returned to the applicant, and two prints retained in the files of the planning division. 
(b)  Requested reports; contents. Before acting on the flea market site plan layout, the planning division may request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the proposed development, such as the district highway engineer, and public utilities. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the requirement of this chapter, and include comments on other factors which bear upon the public interest. The responsibility of securing said reports is that of the planning division staff. 
(c)  Application for permit to construct flea market; plans. Any time after approval of the final site plan by the planning division, application may be made to the inspections and code enforcement division for a permit for the construction of the flea market. Five complete sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the inspections and code enforcement division with 1 set to be returned to the planning division upon issuance of a permit containing the following: 
(1)  The approved final site plan. 
(2)  Location of water and sewer lines and user pipes and manholes. 
(3)  Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewer lines, storm drainage system, refuse and sewerage disposal facilities. 
(4)  Plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed, altered or extended within the flea market. 
(5)  The location of details of lighting and electrical systems. 
(d)  Review of application; issuance of construction permit. Upon review of the application, and subject to evidence that the flea market meets the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Health by the Columbus department of public health, the inspections and code enforcement division shall issue a permit when a review of the application and inspection of the site demonstrates that the proposed or existing flea market meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Procedure for site plan layout approval. The procedure for obtaining site plan layout approval of a flea market is as follows: 
(1)  All plats submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the first working day of the month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 15th day of the same month. 
(2)  All flea market site plan layouts submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the 15th day of each month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the first working day of the following month. 
Please note: When a first or 15th day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, preliminary site plans may be submitted on the following work day. 
a.  At least five black or blue line prints of the site plan layout prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations shall be submitted. 
b.  Review, comment and/or approval of the site plan shall be made by the director of the planning division, the review, comment and/or approval shall be noted on all copies of the site plan as submitted. Four prints shall be returned to the applicant and one print retained by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 302.1, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 8; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; subdivisions, Ch. 19; site plan, tree protection, § 20A-8; Zoning, Ch. 22; mapped streets requirements, § 22-29; planning advisory commission, § 22-38. 
Sec. 11B-24. - Inspections. 
(a)  The inspections and code enforcement division is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The inspections and code enforcement division shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The inspections and code enforcement division may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of public health relating to any of the rules and regulations of state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of public health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the inspections and code enforcement division. 
(d)  The health officer's representative shall notify the inspections and code enforcement division of such violations and requirements for corrections. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 11B-25. - Revocation. 
Any permit for a flea market may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  Should the inspections and code enforcement division find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, shall give notice to the permittee or owner that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within 30 days, the permit will be revoked. 
(2)  If at the end of 30 days, a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, the inspections and code enforcement division shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension in writing to the permittee or owner. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee or owner shall cease operation and/or construction of the flea market. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 304, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-26. - Inspections to determine compliance of existing flea markets; exemption. 
Upon enactment of this chapter all existing flea markets shall be inspected by the inspections and code enforcement division, to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms as set forth within. All flea markets which have less than one acre of land will be exempt from this requirement, but shall be required to come into compliance with all other provisions of this chapter within 12 months from the date of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 305, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-27. - Appeals. 
(a)  Petition. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter relating to flea markets, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of zoning appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the inspections and code enforcement division a written statement of the grounds of such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and suspension except in the case of an order issued under section 11B-28. Upon receipt of such request, the board of zoning appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
(b)  Hearing. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  Order of board of zoning appeals. After such hearing the board of zoning appeals shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the flea market affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 306, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Board of zoning appeals, § 22-37. 
Sec. 11B-28. - Emergencies. 
(a)  Whenever the director of the inspections and code enforcement division finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, including violations of any of the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public health or Georgia Department of Public Health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existing of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of zoning appeals, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. 
(b)  The provisions of section 11B-27 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 307, 11-17-87) 
Secs. 11B-29—11B-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 8; zoning, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 11B-41. - Minimum size of flea markets. 
The minimum size of a flea market shall be one acre. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 401, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-42. - Density. 
The maximum number of flea market booths per gross acre exclusive of off street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 402, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-43. - Flea market booths generally. 
(a)  Flea market booths shall be located on individual stands. 
(b)  Each booth shall contain not more than 100 square feet of area. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 403, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-44. - Site improvement requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(b)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every flea market shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and/or mud. 
(c)  Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every flea market shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. 
(d)  Separation between flea market booths. Flea market booths shall be separated from each other and from other buildings by at least ten feet of open space. 
(e)  Setbacks, buffer strips, screening. 
(1)  All flea markets shall be located at least 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way and at least ten feet from the exterior property boundary lines. 
(2)  All flea markets adjacent to residential uses shall be provided with screening of a well-maintained opaque fence(s) along the boundary line separating the market and adjacent zoning and uses. Such screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(f)  Street system. 
(1)  General requirements. All flea markets shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads or highways. 
(2)  Access. Access to flea markets shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the market streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of 36 feet where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width of 27 feet where parking is limited to one side. 
(g)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all flea markets. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of five and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross sales area. 
(h)  Walks, general requirements. All flea markets shall be provided with safe, convenient, all-season, dust free, pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use and durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. 
(i)  Flea market stands. 
(1)  The flea market stand shall be constructed of materials which will provide an adequate foundation for the placement of flea market booths, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. 
(2)  The flea market stands shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the flea market booth due to inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure. 
(j)  Identification. Each booth shall be numbered. Each number shall be easily identified from the nearest street or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 404, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; traffic, Ch. 20; off-street parking requirements, § 22-32. 
Sec. 11B-45. - Water supply requirements. 
(a)  Generally. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each flea market. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the Georgia Department of Public Health in accordance with rules and regulations for water supply quality control. 
(b)  Compliance with plumbing code. The water supply system of the flea market shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 405, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 8-11.1 et seq.; water, § 13-351 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-46. - Restroom and sewage disposal. 
(a)  There shall be a minimum of one central restroom facility located on the premises. Within that central restroom there shall be separate facilities for men and women. 
(b)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory and sink; cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(c)  Restrooms shall contain the minimum of fixtures as required by the Standard Plumbing Code. 
(d)  An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all flea markets for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system and connection shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of the city, and the approval of the Georgia Department of Public Health and Georgia Water Quality Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 406, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 18-11.1 et seq.; sewers, § 13-173 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-47. - Electrical distribution system. 
Every flea market shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances for each flea market stand, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable electric codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 407, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Electrical code, 8-17 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-48. - Structural requirements. 
All structures to include booths shall comply with the building code of the city. All materials used shall be grade marked lumber, as specified by Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 408, 11-17-87) 
Sec. 11B-49. - Fireplaces, etc. 
Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and woodburning stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to avoid fire hazards and smoke nuisance, both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. No refuse shall be burned at any time. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 408.1, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Fire protection generally, § 11-1 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 11-21 et seq.; nuisances, § 13-98 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-50. - Refuse handling. 
(a)  Generally. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the flea markets shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(b)  Containers. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent-proof containers provided by the flea market park operator for each flea market stand in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. The containers may be placed at curbside for collection only on days of scheduled collection. At other times containers shall be located in a protected manner and restricted from general view. 
(c)  Refuse collection stands. Where refuse collection stands are provided for common or joint use, such stands shall be located not more than 150 feet from using flea market stand, and shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, so minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
(d)  Bulk waste containers. Where bulk waste containers of three cubic yards are utilized, a suitable concrete pad shall be provided for parking the container, supplied with a drain connected to sewage disposal facilities and available hot and cold water connections convenient for washing the container. 
(e)  Collection; transportation. All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the flea market operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(f)  City disposal site. Where municipal or private collection service is not available, the flea market operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to the city disposal site. 
(g)  Refuse incinerators. Refuse incinerators and their operation shall comply with provisions of the air quality standards of Georgia Department of Public Health, and shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the flea market. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 409, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Solid waste collection and disposal, § 13-167 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-51. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Extermination. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority. 
(b)  Accumulations of debris. Flea markets shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
(d)  Exterior openings. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
(e)  Growth of weeds, etc. to be controlled. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Flea markets shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 410, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Prevention and control of mosquitoes and rodents, § 13-112; growth of weeds, § 13-113. 
Sec. 11B-52. - Fuel supply and storage. 
(a)  Natural gas system. Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of the city. 
(b)  Liquified petroleum gas systems. Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of the city. 
(c)  Fuel oil supply system. All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 411, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Gas code, § 8-15 et seq. 
Sec. 11B-53. - Fire protection. 
(a)  The flea markets shall be subject to fire prevention ordinances adopted by the Council of Columbus. 
(b)  Flea markets shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(c)  Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention bureau shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire protection bureau and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(d)  Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
(e)  Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by fire department and approved by the department of utilities. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 412, 11-17-87) 
Cross reference— Fire protection generally, § 11-1 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 11-21 et seq. 
Secs. 11B-54—11B-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION 

Sec. 11B-61. - Responsibilities of flea market management. 
(a)  Compliance required. The person to whom a permit for a flea market is issued shall operate a flea market in compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park [market], its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Notification of tenants. The flea market management shall notify market tenants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
(c)  Placement of booths. The flea market management shall supervise the placement of each flea market booth on its stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  Notification of communicable or contagious disease. The flea market management shall notify the department of public health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the flea market. 
(Ord. No. 87-159, § 501, 11-17-87) 
Chapter 12 - FRANCHISES[1] 
SOUTHERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY 
It is ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Columbus that permission be, and the same is hereby granted to the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors and assigns to erect, operate and maintain lines of telephone and telegraph, including the necessary poles, fixtures and electrical conductors upon, along and over and subways for electrical conductors under the public roads, streets and highways of the City of Columbus, as its business may from time to time require; provided, that all poles shall be neat, symmetrical and painted in conformity with the present city laws or any subsequent city laws relating to poles and that no electrical conductor shall be placed less than 20 feet above the surface of the ground. 
That the work of erecting and locating poles, and constructing subways and all other work done in the streets by virtue of this ordinance shall be done under the supervision and approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, which approval must first be obtained before the commencement of any work, and the said Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company shall replace and properly relay any sidewalk or street that may be displaced by reason of the erection or construction of such poles or subways as directed by the Superintendent of Public Works, and upon failure of the company after notice shall have been given by the Superintendent of Public Works to said company to begin such repairs at once and continue the work with diligence until completed satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works, the city may make such repairs and collect the cost of the same from the company. 
Said company shall provide one cross-arm on each pole, and space not to exceed one duct in the subways constructed by virtue of this ordinance, for the free use of the police and fire alarm telegraph system of the City of Columbus, when so required by the Mayor. 
Said company shall at all times be subject to the city ordinances now in existence or which may hereafter be passed relative to the use of the public streets by telephone and telegraph companies and to any and all other ordinances relative to the use of the streets or otherwise when applicable. 
Said company shall indemnify the City of Columbus, Georgia, against and assume all liabilities for damages which may arise or accrue to the City of Columbus or to any person holding the city liable from any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work or growing out of any work done herein authorized or the neglect of said company or any of its employees to comply with any ordinance relative to the use of the streets of said city, and the operation of the company under this ordinance shall be an agreement by it to pay to the City of Columbus any sum of money for which the city may become liable from or by reason of such injury. 
This ordinance is to be construed as a permit or franchise and not as a contract between the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company and the City of Columbus. [2] 
This ordinance shall be in force from and after the date of its passage. 
Adopted in council October 4, 1899. Approved October 5, 1899. 
(Code 1914, §§ 604-609.) 
GAS LIGHT COMPANY OF COLUMBUS 
ORDINANCE NO. 81-149 
An ordinance granting to Gas Light Company of Columbus, a corporation under the laws of Georgia, with its principal office and place of business in Columbus, Georgia, and its successors, the right and privilege to engage in the business of the purchase, production, distribution and sale of natural and manufactured gas in Columbus, Georgia; fixing the terms and conditions of such grant; defining words and terms used herein; and for other purposes. 
Be it Ordained By the Council of Columbus, Georgia, as Follows: 
Section 1. Definition of Terms. 
The word company, whenever used in this ordinance, shall, unless otherwise modified, be held to mean Gas Light Company of Columbus, a corporation under the laws of Georgia, with its principal office and place of business in Columbus, Georgia, and its successors. 
The word city, whenever used in this ordinance, shall be held to mean Columbus, Georgia. 
The word council, when used in this ordinance, shall be held to mean the council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 2. Nature of Grant. 
The authority, right and privilege is hereby granted to said company, for and in consideration of and subject to the conditions and provisions of this ordinance, to engage in the business of the purchase, production, distribution and sale of natural and manufactured gas in said city. The term for which said authority, right and privilege is granted is 25 years from the date this ordinance becomes effective, and said company binds itself to continue and maintain the operation of said business for said period. 
Section 3. Extension by Annexation. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city, the portion of any of the said utility that may be located or operated within such annexed territory shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this grant. 
Section 4. Compensation for Grant of Franchise. 
In consideration of the grant of this franchise said company shall pay to Columbus, Georgia, a sum equal to three percent of its gross sales of natural and artificial gas to residential and commercial consumers within the limits of Columbus, Georgia. Should any question arise as to the definition, construction and meaning of the term "residential and commercial consumers," the meaning of such term as defined by the rules and regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission shall control. The payment of the percentage of gross receipts above provided for shall be in lieu of all specific, occupation, license, excise, sales, special and franchise taxes; but not in lieu of ad valorem taxes on property or license taxes on the sale of appliances or on sales other than of gas, and whatever amount, if any, shall at any time be required or exacted for the benefit of Columbus, Georgia, on any of said accounts other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances or on sales other than of gas, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage charges. Nothing herein shall exempt the property of said company from assessment for street improvements. 
Payments shall be made regularly on the 15th day of April, July, October and January of each year, each of such payments to be based on the gross sales of the three calendar months immediately preceding the month on the fifteenth day of which such payments are due. 
Pursuant to the law of Georgia, Georgia Public Revenue Code, Section 91A-1806, should an ad valorem tax be assessed by the city on the value of the franchise of said company, the amount necessary to pay said ad valorem tax on said franchise shall be deducted by the company from the fixed percentage charges on sales of gas due during the year in which such ad valorem tax on the franchise is assessed. 
Section 5. Lease or Assignment of Franchise. 
This grant shall not be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated except with the express consent of the council of Columbus, Georgia. This provision is not to be construed to restrict the right and power of mortgaging, by security deed or otherwise, the franchises or any other property of the company, nor of the company's merging or consolidating with another corporation. 
Section 6. Use of Streets and Public Places. 
The rights granted by the city to the company under the provisions hereof include the right on the part of the company to construct, lay and maintain in the public streets, avenues, alleys, squares and public grounds of the city, gas pipes and mains for the purpose of conducting and distributing gas, together with the right to construct, lay and maintain in said streets and other public places the accessories necessary to the purpose of so conducting and distributing gas. The right is also granted the company to repair, replace, enlarge, and extend its pipes, mains and necessary accessories in said streets and other public places. 
In constructing, laying, maintaining, repairing, replacing, enlarging and extending its pipes, mains and necessary accessories in said streets and other public places, said company shall at all times be subject to and comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city nor or hereafter in force applicable to the use of said streets and other public places for purposes for which this franchise is granted. All plans, specifications, material and apparatus used by the company in the construction and operation of the gas system shall be of a type approved by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
No excavations or work shall be done by the company in the streets or other public places of the city until a permit has been applied for by the company and granted by the official of the city charged with such duty. No permit shall be refused where the request is made in conformity to the general ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and the purpose for which the permit is desired is not in violation of such general ordinances, rules and regulations nor in violation of the terms of this franchise. 
In addition to complying with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, where the use of the public streets and other public places are involved, the company shall at all times be subject to and comply with all other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city enacted or promulgated under the police powers of the city for the safety and protection of the general public. 
Section 7. Repair of Streets and Public Places. 
All excavations, construction, repair and other work done by the company in the streets or other public places of the city shall be at the expense of the company, and all parts of streets and other public places shall be restored by the company so as to leave them in the same condition as before such acts on the part of the company. The company shall compensate the city for all damage to the streets and other public places caused by acts or omissions of the company in making excavations, and in constructing, laying, maintaining, repairing, replacing, enlarging and extending the company's pipes, mains and other accessories. 
Section 8. Indemnification of the City. 
The company shall at all times protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all claims against the city, its officers, agents or employees, on account of damage, injury or loss to persons, natural and artificial, and to public and private property, caused by or arising out of any acts of negligence of the company, its officers, agents, employees or independent contractors doing work for the company. 
Section 9. This Franchise Supplementary to Original Franchise. 
This franchise granted by Columbus, Georgia, to Gas Light Company of Columbus, Columbus, Georgia, is not in derogation of, or in lieu of, or in substitution for the rights, privileges, powers and immunities contained in the franchise set forth in the charter of said company, Georgia Laws 1853-'54, page 397; but is supplementary to said rights, privileges, powers and immunities. 
This franchise is granted in lieu of the franchise ordained by an ordinance of October 26, 1948, of the commission of the City of Columbus and said franchise of October 26, 1948, shall terminate upon the effective date of this ordinance; provided, however, the payments required by Section 4 of said former ordinance and of this ordinance shall be paid in the amounts and on the dates therein specified as though this franchise had been in effect throughout the period since the last payment required under said former ordinance became due; and provided further, that said former franchise shall remain in full force and effect as to any rights, duties and liabilities heretofore incurred thereunder. 
Section 10. Acceptance of Franchise. 
This grant is made upon the express condition that the company, within 90 days after the adoption of this ordinance by the council, shall file with the city clerk of Columbus, Georgia, a written acceptance of the same, together with a certified copy of the resolution of the board of directors of said company authorizing the executive officers of the company to accept such franchise; and when this ordinance shall have been so accepted by the company, such ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the city and the company for all purposes set forth in this ordinance. The company, by its acceptance of the provisions of this ordinance, binds itself to provide the necessary gas service contemplated in this ordinance, continuing without substantial interruption, except for the cause beyond its control, until the expiration of the term of this grant. In the event that said company fails to file said written acceptance within the time hereinbefore specified, this grant shall be void and of no effect. 
Section 11. Effective Date. 
In the event the company accepts the franchise herein granted within the time and in the manner hereinbefore set forth, this ordinance shall become effective 90 days from the date of its adoption by the council. 
Section 12. Separability Clause. 
Should any provision of this ordinance or the franchise here granted be declared invalid for any cause, the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby. 
Introduced and read at a regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 15th day of December, 1981; read a second time at a regular meeting of said Council held on the 22nd day of December, 1981, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of nine members of said Council. 
CHATTAHOOCHEE VALLEY CATV 
ORDINANCE NO. 64-91 
Section 1. In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, a nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Chattahoochee Valley CATV, a joint venture, composed of Martin Theatres of Georgia, Inc., a Muscogee County, Georgia Corporation, and Columbus Broadcasting Company, Inc., a Muscogee County, Georgia Corporation, its successors, designees or assigns, provided such successors, designees or assigns are approved by this commission, hereinafter referred to as "company," the right to operate a community antenna system within the city limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables, in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in the City of Columbus, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of said city, for a period of 25 years from the date hereof under the terms and conditions hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. Wherever used in this ordinance, the word "television" shall mean a system for transmission of audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Section 3. The poles used for the company's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, with the approval of locating poles by the city manager and city engineer. 
Section 4. The company's transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such interference will be at company's expense. 
Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Columbus, affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
Installation and housedrop hardware shall be uniform throughout the city, except that the company shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the art progresses. 
Section 5. In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the company in the course of its operations shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights. 
Section 6. Installations shall be maintained so as not to interfere with TV reception already in existence. 
Section 7. That five viewing channels including all local TV channels shall be furnished as a minimum; and charges for the services rendered by the company shall be made for all channels and not for single channels or single programs. 
Section 8. All rates and charges of the company shall be fair, reasonable, just and uniform, and shall be subject to the rules and regulations of any state or federal authority which may subsequently, by due process of law, acquire jurisdiction over this type of industry or enterprise. The single outlet residential monthly service rate shall be a maximum of $6.00 per month, each additional outlet at a residence shall be a maximum rate of $2.50 per month. The rates hereby established are subject to change by the company upon application and approval by the city commission of the City of Columbus. 
Section 9. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver who has or owns a color TV receiver. 
Section 10. The distribution system of the Company to be hereafter installed shall not be abandoned either in whole or in part without the consent of this commission. In the event of the failure of the company to let a contract for the installation and construction of the system within 180 days after the enactment of this ordinance, or in the event of the failure of the company to render community television service to the City of Columbus and the inhabitants thereof, as contemplated and provided for by this ordinance, on or before the 7th day of December, 1968, this commission shall have the right, on reasonable notice to the company, to declare this ordinance and the rights and franchise granted hereunder forfeited; provided, however, failure to comply with these terms by reason of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the company which could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of its terms by the company, shall not be sufficient grounds to declare a forfeiture. [3] 
Section 11. The company shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the city from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any workmen's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within the city, or by any act of the company, its agents or employees. The company shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than $25,000.00 as to any one accident and not less than $200,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year; and against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons not less than $100,000.00 as to any one person and not less than $300,000.00 as to any one accident. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under any workmen's compensation laws in effect which may be applicable to the company. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. Said policy or policies of insurance or a certified copy or copies thereof shall be approved by the city attorney and then deposited with and kept on file by the city clerk. 
Section 12. The company shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose acceptable to the company, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the company's own wires and fixtures, and the city shall hold the company harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage caused by the placing of the city's wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the company. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
Section 13. At the time this franchise becomes effective the company shall furnish a bond to the city in the amount of $10,000.00, in such form and with such sureties as shall be acceptable to the city, guaranteeing the payment of all sums, which may at any time become due from the company to the city under the terms of this franchise (except such sums as are covered by the insurance provided for in Section 12), and further guaranteeing the faithful performance of all of the obligations of the company under the terms of this franchise. 
Section 14. The company agrees to install signal distribution facilities subject to satisfactory pole clearance and pole rental arrangements to all residents who are subscribers of the system of the city with a population density of 50 homes per mile of system or more. 
Section 15. In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the company, the company will pay to the City of Columbus three percent of the gross receipts of the company, exclusive of installation charges. 
Section 16. The company shall not be authorized to engage in the sale or servicing of television sets or appliances. 
Section 17. Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of record, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid. 
Section 18. This ordinance shall be published, within ten days after its final passage in the Columbus Ledger, a newspaper of general circulation published in the City of Columbus, to become effective on the 30th day after passage. 
Section 19. It is the stated intention of the City of Columbus that all other holders of public franchises shall cooperate with the company to allow the company's joint usage of their poles and pole line facilities wherever possible or wherever such usage does not interfere with the normal operation of said poles and pole lines, so that the number of additional poles constructed by the company may be minimized. 
Adopted the 7th day of December, 1964. 
TELECABLE OF COLUMBUS, INC. [4] 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-112 
Appendices A, B and C, attached to the franchise agreement, are not included herein, but are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Section 1. Definitions. 
As used in this document, a word or term shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the cable television industry unless it is apparent from the context that such word or term has a different meaning or unless such word or term is specifically defined herein. 
Section. 2. Grant of authority to operate and term of franchise. 
2.1. Grant. The city hereby grants to the grantee the right to construct, erect, operate, and maintain a cable television system in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the streets, alleys, public ways, public places, and other specific locations mutually agreeable to the city and grantee within the city's boundaries, which boundaries also constitute the grantee's area of service. 
2.2. Nonexclusive franchise. This grant of authority or franchise to operate a cable television system in the city and the right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways, and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive. The city reserves the right, at its discretion, to grant franchises to other cable operators. 
2.3. Term of franchise. This grant of authority shall run for a term of 15 years beginning on January 1, 1992 (which shall be the effective date of this franchise) and ending on January 1, 2007. 
Section. 3. Emergency override. 
3.1. The grantee shall provide an emergency alert system which will allow the city authorities to interrupt cable programming with emergency alert audio announcements. 
3.2 Alternative power sources. The grantee shall maintain alternative power sources so that all trunk lines or a minimum of 50 percent of all lines will be maintained at full power for at least two hours beyond the time when normal power sources have ceased. Grantee agrees to a minimum of 70 percent by 1998. 
3.3. Institutional use. If technically feasible, the grantee shall install microwave transmission facilities of the Government Center to transmit programming from the Government Center and Trade Center to its head-end facilities for insertion on the government access channel. The city shall provide appropriate space, power, and other necessary on-site accommodations. The grantee shall in addition provide a character generator, camera, recorder, and monitor unless it has already been provided for the city's use on the government access channel. 
Section. 4. Operation and services. 
4.1. Insurance. Grantee shall maintain at all times liability insurance or be self insured as described Appendix A. [5] 
4.2. Service standards. The grantee agrees to comply with the standards and procedures as specifically described on Appendix B. [6] 
4.3. Education and government access channel. Grantee shall immediately at the request of the city set aside and dedicate one channel for city government and educational purposes (the "education and government access channel"). Grantee shall be permitted to utilize any unused time on any education and government access channel. 
4.4. Local origination channel. If grantee has constructed a studio at its operation center, then grantee will provide one additional channel for local origination purposes ("local origination channel"). Grantee shall promulgate reasonable rules and procedures for the content and use of this channel by community groups and individuals. 
4.5. Studio facilities and technical assistance. In the event grantee constructs a studio at grantee's operation center, then grantee shall upon request, with reasonable notice, and at sole convenience of grantee, make these facilities available to the city free of charge up to a maximum of 20 hours in any month and up to a maximum of 200 hours per year. 
4.6. Public service and promotional announcements. Grantee shall allocate advertising time to the city for advertising or promotional use equitably with other public service announcements. Grantee shall reasonably assist the city in the creation of such public service announcements utilizing the facilities and/or production facilities described in subsection 4.5. 
4.6.1. No reduction in franchise fees. Grantee agrees that the cost of meeting the requirements of subsections 3.3, 4.3, 4.5, and 4.6 will not reduce, offset, or be credited against a franchise fees payable to the city. 
4.7. Technical, operational, and maintenance standards. The grantee shall comply with the following technical, operational, and maintenance standards: 
4.7.1. The grantee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, and construction standards of the State of Georgia and of the city; the NCTA Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems, published by the National Cable Television Association; National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); and in accordance with all FCC regulations. 
4.7.2. If the city has facts or other reasonable grounds to believe that the signal quality or technical performances of the cable system is, in a specific location or area, not meeting required levels, then upon the city's reasonable request, the grantee shall test, analyze, and report to the city on the performance of the system. 
Section. 5. Line extension policy. 
It is the desire of the city that cable service be provided to all residential areas within the territorial limits of the city. Where any residential area not served by cable consists of at least 30 existing homes per street mile (for aerial cable) or 50 existing homes per street mile (for underground cable) as measured from existing feeder cable plant, then the cable plant shall be extended to such area and cable service provided there at the grantee's cost. This line extension policy is not intended to require the grantee to "overbuild" or to provide cable services already served by other cable operators. 
Section. 6. Certain government and public school facilities to receive free connections. 
The grantee shall provide free connection and monthly standard service to all occupied government buildings (one outlet), provided said buildings are located within 300 feet of grantee's distribution system. The facilities eligible to receive these connections and services shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
All buildings owned and/or used by the city presently and in the future for municipal purposes 
All public schools 
All publicly owned day care centers 
Police departments 
Fire departments 
Section. 7. Specialized use of satellite facilities. 
Grantee will make available a portable satellite receiving antenna for use by the city and the Muscogee County School System, free of charge. 
Section. 8. Fees. 
8.1. In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the grantee, the grantee will pay quarterly to Columbus, Georgia, beginning January 1, 1992, a franchise fee of five percent of the grantee gross revenues billed after January 1, 1992. 
8.2. Gross revenues shall mean all payments received by grantee, parent, or subset of grantee from any source whatsoever arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable services by grantee within the city or in any way derived from the operation of its system within the city, including, but not limited to, basic service monthly fees, tiered service monthly fees, pay t.v., pay-per-view, lease channel fees, converter rentals or sales, installation fees, and advertising receipts. 
8.3. Advertising revenues will not be included in gross revenues until the quarter beginning June 1, 1998. However, advertising revenues shall be included in any earlier date when TCI of Columbus and American Cable both voluntarily agree to amend their franchises to provide for the assessment of a franchise fee on advertising revenues or grantee provides service to more than 80 percent of the cable subscribers in the city. 
Section. 9. Financial reports. 
9.1. Not later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of grantee, grantee shall cause to be prepared and certified as being correct a financial report ("financial report") as shown in Appendix C of this agreement. Reasonable records will be made available to a representative of the city, in the city, for the past three fiscal years. [7] 
Section. 10. Enforcement of franchise provisions. 
The grantee hereby recognizes its obligations under this franchise. The grantee hereby pledges to fulfill any and all obligations, including, but not limited to: 
Payment of franchise fee; 
Providing any reasonably required data for enforcement of this franchise and requested in writing by the city; 
Providing in a continuous manner the type of services pledged in the franchise according to specified standards. 
In the event the grantee fails to provide information or services as listed above or elsewhere in the franchise agreement, the city may inform the grantee and require corrective action of the grantee in the franchise agreement, the city may inform the grantee and required corrective action of the grantee in the manner outlined below: 
The city manager may first inform the grantee of any failures in an informal manner. The grantee shall make a diligent attempt to take prompt corrective action within a two-week period, or immediately if the grantee failure poses a safety hazard. In the event the grantee fails to take corrective actions, or to schedule corrective action, within a 30-day period, the city manager may, in writing, inform the grantee of its failure to comply with the terms of the franchise. Grantee shall respond to this notification within a seven-day period specifying its intent and method of coming into compliance with the franchise. In the event that the grantee does not respond to the city manager as requested, the city manager may inform the mayor and council of the grantee's failure to comply with the terms of the franchise. The city manager may specify, in writing, the specific failure or failures of the grantee and the section of the franchise agreement which is not being met. The city manager may also specify the remedial action required of the grantee to come into compliance with the franchise agreement. 
The mayor and council may then call for a hearing where a presentation of information by the city manager and a response by the grantee will be heard. After a review the mayor and council will determine if the grantee is complying with the franchise agreement. Furthermore, the mayor and council may endorse, modify, or alter the city manager's recommendations to bring the grantee into compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement. In the event the grantee fails to adhere to the recommendations of council and the council may elect to revoke this franchise by initiating appropriate court proceedings. 
Section. 11. Representations and warranties. 
11.1. The grantee shall indemnify, protect, save, and hold harmless Columbus, Georgia, from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under Workmen's Compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within Columbus, Georgia, or by any act of the grantee, its agents or employees. 
11.2. The grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting this franchise, it does and did so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant this franchise. 
11.3. The grantee, by acceptance of this franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term of condition of this franchise not expressed herein. 
11.4. The grantee represents and warrants that it has the power and authority to enter into this franchise agreement by and through the representative who has signed this franchise agreement on its behalf, and that it has the power and ability to do all the acts required of it under this franchise agreement. The grantee shall provide a corporate resolution to that effect simultaneously with the signing hereof and a current certificate of existence from its state of incorporation, and, if a foreign corporation, its documentation of having registered in the state of Georgia. 
11.5. Any subsequent amendment(s) to the city Code, any Federal Cable Act, or any cable ordinance shall not affect this franchise agreement except to the extent permitted by this franchise agreement. 
11.6. The headnotes or titles to the sections herein are inserted only as a matter of convenience and for reference, and in no way confine, limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provision of this franchise agreement. 
11.7. The city may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other service, including, but not limited to, ancillary charges relating thereto, except as authorized pursuant to federal and state law including, but not limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and FCC Rules and Regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, the grantee has the right to modify its rates and charges, including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however, that the grantee shall give written notice to the Council of Columbus, Georgia, of any such modifications or additional charges 30 days prior to the effective date thereof. 
11.8. Grantee agrees to comply with the Sherman Anti-Trust Act, all FCC regulations, Robinson-Patman Act, and the Federal Cable Act. The city does not condone any practice of grantee which is harmful to the competitive process and to the consumer. 
Section. 12. Severability. 
The foregoing provisions, requirements, and conditions are agreed to by the grantee in return for the granting of the franchise by Columbus, Georgia. Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of record, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid. 
COLUMBUS CABLEVISION, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 72-5 
An Ordinance granting to Columbus Cablevision, Inc., a Muscogee County, Georgia corporation, the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables, in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of said city, for a period of 25 years commencing December 7, 1964, and regulating the same; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, a nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Columbus Cablevision, Inc., a Muscogee County, Georgia corporation, its successors, designees or assigns, provided such successors, designees or assigns are approved by this Council hereinafter referred to as "company," the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables, in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of Columbus, Georgia, for a period of 25 years from December 7, 1964 under the terms and conditions hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. Wherever used in this ordinance, the word "television" shall mean a system for transmission of audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Section 3. The poles used for the company's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company, when and where practicable, providing mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, with the approval of locating poles by the manager and engineer of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 4. The company's transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements Columbus, Georgia, may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such interference will be at company's expense. 
Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of Columbus, Georgia, affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
Installation and housedrop hardware shall be uniform throughout Columbus, Georgia, except that the company shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the art progresses. 
Section 5. In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the company in the course of its operations shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights. 
Section 6. Installations shall be maintained so as not to interfere with TV reception already in existence. 
Section 7. That five viewing channels including all local TV channels shall be furnished as a minimum; and charges for the services rendered by the company shall be made for all channels and not for single channels or single programs. 
Section 8. All rates and charges of the company shall be fair, reasonable, just and uniform, and shall be subject to the rules and regulations of any state or federal authority which may subsequently, by due process of law, acquire jurisdiction over this type of industry or enterprise. The monthly rates for service may not be adjusted upward more than $1.00 for the regular monthly rate nor more than $0.50 for the additional outlet rate in any 12-month period. No rate increase or new charge shall be initiated without first having given the council of Columbus, Georgia 30 days notice of such new rate or charge by filing the new rate or charge with the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 76-98, §§ 1—3, 7-27-76; Ord. No. 78-40, § 1, 4-11-78) 
Section 9. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver who has or owns a color TV receiver. 
Section 10. The distribution system of the company to be hereafter installed shall not be abandoned either in whole or in part without the consent of this council. 
Section 11. The company shall indemnify, protect and save harmless Columbus, Georgia from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any workmen's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within Columbus, Georgia, or by any act of the company, its agents or employees. The company shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than $25,000.00 as to any one accident and not less than $200,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year; and against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons not less than $100,000.00 as to any one person and not less than $300,000.00 as to any one accident. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under any workmen's compensation laws in effect which may be applicable to the company. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. Said policy or policies of insurance or a certified copy or copies thereof shall be approved by the attorney for Columbus, Georgia, and then deposited with and kept on file by the clerk of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 12. The company shall grant to Columbus, Georgia, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose acceptable to the company, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the company's own wires and fixtures, and Columbus, Georgia, shall hold the company harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage caused by the placing of its wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the company. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
Section 13. At the time this franchise becomes effective the company shall furnish a bond to Columbus, Georgia, in the amount of $10,000.00, in such form and with such sureties as shall be acceptable to Columbus, Georgia, guaranteeing the payment of all sums, which may at any time become due from the company to Columbus, Georgia, under the terms of this franchise (except such sums as are covered by the insurance provided for in section 12), and further guaranteeing the faithful performance of all of the obligations of the company under the terms of this franchise. 
Section 14. The company agrees to install signal distribution facilities subject to satisfactory pole clearance and pole rental arrangements to all residents who are subscribers of the system of Columbus, Georgia, with a population density of 50 homes per mile of system or more. 
Section 15. In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the company, the company will pay to Columbus, Georgia, three percent of the gross receipts of the company, exclusive of installation charges. 
Section 16. The company shall not be authorized to engage in the sale or servicing of television sets or appliances. 
Section 17. Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of record, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid. 
Section 18. This ordinance shall be published, within ten days after its final passage in the Columbus Ledger, a newspaper of general circulation published in Columbus, Georgia, to become effective as provided by law. 
Section 19. It is the stated intention of Columbus, Georgia, that all other holders of public franchises shall cooperate with the company to allow the company's joint usage of their poles and pole line facilities wherever possible or wherever such usage does not interfere with the normal operation of said poles and pole lines, so that the number of additional poles constructed by the company may be minimized. 
Introduced and read at a regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 4th day of January, 1972; read a second time at a regular meeting of said Council held on the 11th day of January, 1972, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of 10 members of said Council. 
GEORGIA POWER COMPANY [8] 
ORDINANCE NO. 05-84 
Ordinance granting permission and consent to Georgia Power Company, a Georgia corporation, and its successors, lessees, and assigns (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "company") to occupy the streets and public places of Columbus, Georgia, a body politic and corporate and a political subdivision of the State of Georgia (hereinafter referred to as the "city"), in constructing, maintaining, operating, and extending poles, lines, cables, equipment, and other apparatus for transmitting and distributing electricity and for other purposes. 
Section I. Be it ordained by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, that the authority, right, permission, and consent are hereby granted to the company, for a period of 35 years from the date of the company's acceptance hereof, to occupy and use the streets, alleys, and public places of the city within the present and future corporate limits of the city as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation, and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cable, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "company's facilities") for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying, and distributing electricity for light, hear, power, and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys, and public places from time to time as the company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to insure safe and efficient service. 
Section II. Be it further ordained that the rights, permission, and consents herein contained are granted for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
1.  The company shall pay into the treasury of the city (a) on or before the first day of March in each year following the granting of this franchise, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules (as prescribed by the Georgia Public Service Commission) within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year and four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under industrial rate schedules (as so prescribed) within the corporate limits of the city during the period beginning and ending on December 31 thereafter and (b) on or before the first day of March of each year thereafter during the term of this franchise, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial, and industrial rate schedules (as so prescribed) with the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year, on condition that in the event the city shall grant to any other entity the right to use and occupy the city's streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. The company, in calculating the sum of money to be paid to the city in each year pursuant to this paragraph 1, shall include gross sales of electric energy to customers who are served under residential, commercial, and industrial rate schedules by the company on any portion of the Fort Benning Reservation that is located within the corporate limits of the city. 
2.  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge, or imposition of any kind required, demanded, or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount from the percentage of gross sales provided for in paragraph 1 of this section II. 
3.  The company shall fully protect, indemnify, and save harmless the city from all damages to persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, or extension of the company's facilities, or conditions of streets, alleys, or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
4.  The company shall, in construction, maintaining, operating, and extending the company's facilities, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained, herein, however, shall require the company to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
5.  For purposes of paragraph 6 of this section II, the term "distribution facilities" means, poles, lines, wires, cables, conductors, insulators, transformers, alliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus installed by or on behalf of the company (whether before of after the adoption of this ordinance) in the streets, alleys, or public places of the city for the purpose of distributing electricity within the present and future corporate limits of the city. Distribution facilities do not include any of the following: (i) electric transmission lines with a design operating voltage of 46 kilovolts or greater (hereinafter referred to as "transmission lines"); (ii) poles, towers, frames, or other supporting structures for transmission lines (hereinafter referred to as "transmission structures"); (iii) transmission lines and related wires, cables, conductors, insulators, or other apparatus attached to transmission structures; (iv) lines, wires, cables, or conductors installed in concrete-encased ductwork; or (v) network underground facilities. 
6.  In the event that the city or any other entity acting on behalf of the city requests or demands that the company relocate any distribution facilities from their then-current locations within the streets, alleys, and public places of the city in connection with a public project or improvement, then the company shall relocate, at its expense, the distribution facilities affected by such project or improvement. The company's obligations under this paragraph 6 shall apply without regard to whether the company has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such distribution facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to the city under the provisions of paragraph 1 of this section II. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph 6, the company shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: (i) distribution facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is required or demanded; (ii) distribution facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widenings, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); (iii) streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or (iv) distribution facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
7.  The city and the company recognize that both parties benefit from economic development within the city. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) within the city, the city and the company shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the city and the company shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in the city's five-year capital improvement plan, the city's short-term work program, or the city's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of the company's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to, (i) both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordination Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or a local utilities coordination council (or any successor organization) and (ii) both parties' use of the National Joint Utility Notification System (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
8.  With regard to each streetscape project undertaken by or on behalf of the city, the city shall pay the company in advance for the company's estimated cost to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) in connection with such project. For each streetscape project, the company shall estimate in good faith the amount of incremental base revenue, if any, that the company will realize as a result of new customer load or expension of existing customer load attributable to such project; and such estimate shall be based on tariffs in effect at the time that construction of such project begins and shall not include fuel recovery charges, non-electric service billings, or taxes. If such estimate indicates that the company will realize incremental base revenue, the company shall do one of the following, whichever results in greater cost savings to the city: (i) reduce the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs by ten percent; or (ii) where the city has developed a bona fide marketing plan within 12 months after construction of such project begins, either refund the amount of the company's incremental base revenue during such twelve-month period to the city or credit such amount against any future payment due from the city to the company. The city and the company acknowledge and agree that the amount of any refund or credit calculated pursuant to clause (ii) of the foregoing sentence of this paragraph 8 shall not exceed the amount of the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs associated with such project. 
Section III. Be it further ordained that nothing contained in this ordinance shall limit or restrict the right of customers within the corporate limits of the city to select an electric supplier as may hereafter be provided by law. 
Section IV. Be it further ordained that from time to time after the approval of this ordinance, the company and the city may enter into such additional agreements as the company and the city deem reasonable and appropriate; provided, however, that such agreements shall not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise granted in this ordinance, shall not extend beyond the term of the franchise, and shall be enforceable separate and apart from the franchise. 
Section V. Be it further ordained that the company shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance, file the company's written acceptance of the franchise granted in this ordinance with the clerk of council, so as to form a contract between the company and the city. 
Section VI. Be it further ordained that upon such acceptance all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the company and the city with respect to the company's use of the city's streets, alleys, and public places, in actual conflict herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
Adopted by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, at a meeting held on November 15, 2005. 
NUVIEW TELEVISION NETWORKS [9] 
[ORDINANCE NO. 87-104] 
AMERICAN CABLE COMPANY 
ORDINANCE NO. 88-53 
An Ordinance granting to American Cable Company, a Muscogee County, Georgia company, the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables, in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of said Columbus, Georgia, for a period of ten years commencing June 1, 1988, and regulating the same; and for other purposes. 
THE COUNCIL OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, a nonexclusive right is hereby granted to American Cable Company, a Muscogee County, Georgia company, its successors, designees or assigns, provided such successors, designees or assigns are approved by this council upon 30 days advance written notice, hereinafter referred to as "company", the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of Columbus, Georgia, for a period of ten years commencing June 1, 1988, under the terms and conditions hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. Wherever used in this ordinance, the word "television" shall mean a system for transmission of audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Section 3. The poles used for the company's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, with the approval of locating poles by the city manager and city engineer of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 4. The company's transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements Columbus, Georgia may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such interference will be at the company's expense. 
Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of Columbus, Georgia affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
Installation and housedrop hardware shall be uniform throughout Columbus, Georgia, except that the company shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the art progresses. 
Section 5. In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the company in the course of its operations shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights. 
Section 6. Installations shall be maintained so as not to interfere with television reception already in existence. 
Section 7. The company shall be required to furnish, in return for the service rate or charge referred to in section 8 of this franchise ordinance, a minimum of 11 viewing channels, including all local television channels. This service shall constitute the basic service of the company, and no charges shall be made on the basis of single channels or single programs for such basic service. The company may offer additional channels providing alternative programming and additional programs originated for cable systems to which the restrictions of this section and of section 8 concerning service rates or charges shall not apply, including pay channels such as HBO, Cinemax, Showtime, the Movie Channel, the Disney Channel, and certain other channels recognized in the industry as a "premium or pay channel." Such channels shall be available solely at the option of the cable subscriber, and the company shall not require a cable subscriber to accept such services as a prerequisite to obtaining or continuing basic cable service. A nondiscriminatory charge may be made by the company for the furnishing of such additional services. Gross revenues derived by the company from the furnishing of such services shall be subject to the franchise fee due Columbus, Georgia, under section 20 of this ordinance. The company, its officers or its manager shall be responsible for the content of the alternative programming service as the obscenity laws of the United States and the State of Georgia may provide, and a final conviction for violation of such laws because of program content of the alternative programming service shall subject the company to a forfeiture of the $10,000.00 bond filed with the city pursuant to section 13 of this franchise agreement. 
Section 8. All rates and charges of the company shall be fair, reasonable, just and uniform for all company subscribers, and shall be subject to applicable state or federal law and to the rules and regulations of any state or federal agency which may now or subsequently, by due process of law, acquire jurisdiction over this type of industry or enterprise. Increases in rates for such basic cable service as described in section 7 of this franchise ordinance by the company shall not exceed five percent per year. No rate increase or new charge shall be initiated without first having given the Council of Columbus, Georgia, 30 days' written notice of such new rate or charge, by filing the same via certified mail with the clerk of council. 
Section 9. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver who has or owns a color television receiver. 
Section 10. The distribution system of the company to be hereafter installed shall not be abandoned either in whole or in part without the consent of the Columbus Council. In the event of the failure of the company to let a contract for the installation and construction of such system within 90 days after the enactment of this ordinance, or in the event of the failure of the company to render community television service to Columbus, Georgia, and the inhabitants thereof, as contemplated and provided for by this franchise ordinance, and particularly by section 14 contained herein, the Columbus Council shall have the right, on reasonable notice to the company, to declare this ordinance and the rights and franchise granted hereunder forfeited; provided, however, failure to comply with these terms by reason of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the company which could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of such terms by the company, shall not be sufficient grounds to declare a forfeiture. 
Section 11. The company shall indemnify, protect, save, and hold harmless Columbus, Georgia, from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any Workmen's Compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within Columbus, Georgia, or by any act of the company, its agents or employees. The company shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgements, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons shall not be less than $500,000.00 as to any one person and not less than $1,000,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence; and against liability due to physical damage to property not less than $500,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence and not less than $1,000,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under any Workmen's Compensation laws in effect which may be applicable to the company. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. Said policy or policies of insurance or a certified copy or copies thereof shall be approved by the attorney for Columbus, Georgia, and then deposited with and kept on file by the clerk of council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 12. The company shall grant to Columbus, Georgia, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the company's own wires and fixtures, and Columbus, Georgia, shall hold the company harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage caused by the placing of its wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the company. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
Section 13. At the time this franchise becomes effective the company shall furnish a bond to Columbus, Georgia, in the amount of $10,000.00, in such form and with such sureties as shall be acceptable to Columbus, Georgia, guaranteeing the payment of all sums, which may at any time become due from the company to Columbus, Georgia, under the terms of this franchise (except such sums as are covered by the insurance provided for in section 11), and further guaranteeing the faithful performance of all of the obligations of the company under the terms of this franchise. 
Section 14. The company agrees to install signal distribution facilities subject to satisfactory pole clearance and pole rental arrangements, to all residents who are subscribers of the system of Columbus, Georgia, with a population density of 35 homes per mile of system or more in an area within one-half mile of facilities head-end as of January 1, 1989. The company will provide service within one and one-half miles of head-end beginning January 1, 1990, upon receipt of written request from potential subscribers, provided such potential subscribers pay the equitable share of the cost of line construction where density is less than 35 occupied dwelling units per mile. Such facilities shall be upgraded to 22 channels by December 31, 1995, with authorization of proportionate increases in the basic service rate during the upgrade, subject to the provisions contained in section 8 above governing increases in such rate. The company shall not deny access to cable service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
Section 15. The company is hereby encouraged to effect interconnection with other state, county, city, regional or national communications systems where practical and beneficial, to the extent permitted by applicable state or federal law. 
Section 16. The company will appoint a single point of contact to communicate with the Columbus Council or a committee designated by the council to review service complaints or the chairman thereof. In the event the television signal service or the community antenna system should be interrupted or fail by reason of accident or circumstances otherwise beyond the control of the company, the company shall restore the service within a reasonable time and such interrupted service shall not constitute a breach of this franchise. Any service interruption in excess of 48 hours shall result in a prorated adjustment of a subscriber's bill for such service, except that such a prorated adjustment shall not be required of the company where such interruption is the result of an accident or circumstances otherwise beyond the control of the company. 
Section 17. The company agrees to provide the council of Columbus, Georgia, or a committee designated by the council the following: 
A.  Quarterly statistics including a breakdown as to subscribers of basic service; pay channels; and any pay per view (PPV) programming. 
B.  Right of inspection, within 24 hours upon receipt by the company of a written request from the council or committee designated by the council, of any part of the company's facilities and equipment whenever the same may be located in Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 18. The company shall provide free connection and monthly basic service to all occupied government buildings (one outlet), including the central office of the Muscogee County School District, provided said buildings are located within an area served by the company's distribution system as described in section 14. 
Section 19. The company agrees to attend an annual meeting, or meetings requested by the council or a committee designated by the council, to discuss the state of the system and provision of cable services. Topics will include, but not be limited to: (a) technical performance—past, present, and future; (b) service—past, present, and future. 
Section 20. In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the company, the company will pay quarterly to Columbus, Georgia, a franchise fee of five percent of the gross revenues of the company, exclusive of installation charges. Should the company default in the payment of said sums for a period of 30 days or more, then the rights and franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in Section 10 of this franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, 1-10-89) 
Section 21. The company shall not be authorized to engage in the sale or servicing of television sets or appliances. 
Section 22. In addition to the minimum requirements contained in section 7 above, the company agrees to provide channel capacity for public, educational, or governmental use (PEG), to be made available immediately upon any system growth past 20 channels (channels 21 and above, inclusive). Any such unused PEG channel capacity shall be available for company use. 
Section 23. This ordinance shall be published, within ten days after its final passage in the Columbus Ledger-Enquirer, a newspaper of general circulation published in Columbus, Georgia, and shall become effective as provided by law. 
Section 24. It is the stated intention of Columbus, Georgia, that all other holders of public franchises shall cooperate with the company to allow the company's joint usage of their poles and pole line facilities wherever possible or wherever such usage does not interfere with the normal operation of said poles and pole lines, so that the number of additional poles constructed by the company may be minimized. 
Section 25. The foregoing provisions, requirements, and conditions are agreed to by the company in return for the granting of the franchise by Columbus, Georgia. No change in the operating procedures required by the franchise herein granted shall become effective without the company's having given 30 days' advance written notice to the council of such proposed changes. Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of record, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid. 
Introduced at a regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 10th day of May, 1988; introduced a second time at a regular meeting of said council held on the 17th day of May, 1988, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of seven members of said council. 
TCI CABLEVISION OF GEORGIA 
ORDINANCE NO. 88-85 
An ordinance granting to TCI Cablevision of Georgia, Inc., a Georgia corporation, the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose, to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables, in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of said Columbus, Georgia, for a period of 15 years commencing December 1, 1988, and regulating the same; and for other purposes. 
THE COUNCIL OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, a nonexclusive right is hereby granted to TCI Cablevision of Georgia, Inc., a Georgia corporation, its successors, designees or assigns provided such successors, are approved by this Council upon 30 days' advance written notice, except that no consent or approval of the Council shall be required for transfer of such franchise to a company controlling, controlled by, or under common control with TCI Cablevision of Georgia, Inc., hereinafter referred to as grantee, the right to operate a community antenna system within the limits of Columbus, Georgia, and for such purpose to erect, construct, operate and maintain television transmission and distribution facilities, including coaxial cables in, under, over and along, across and upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in Columbus, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television impulses and television energy for sale to the inhabitants of Columbus, Georgia, for a period of 15 years commencing December 1, 1988, under the terms and conditions hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. Wherever used in this ordinance, the word "television" shall means a system for transmission of audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Section 3. The poles used for the grantee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company or the Georgia Power Company is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies, the grantee shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, with the approval of locating poles by the city manager and city engineer of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 4. The grantee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements Columbus, Georgia may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such interference will be at grantee's expense. 
Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of Columbus, Georgia, affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
Installation and housedrop hardware shall be uniform throughout Columbus, Georgia, except that the grantee shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the art progresses. 
Section 5. In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the grantee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the grantee in the course of its operation shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights. 
Section 6. Installations shall be maintained so as not to interfere with television reception already in existence. 
Section 7. The grantee shall be required to furnish, in return for the service rate or charge referred to in section 8 of this franchise ordinance, a minimum of 11 viewing channels. This service shall constitute the basic service of the grantee and no charges shall be made on the basis of single channels or single programs for such basic service. The grantee may offer additional channels providing alternative programming and additional programs originated for cable systems to which the restrictions of this section shall not apply, including premium and pay channels. Such channels shall be available solely at the option of the cable subscriber, and the grantee shall not require a cable subscriber to accept such services as a prerequisite to obtaining or continuing basic cable service. A nondiscriminatory charge may be made by the grantee for the furnishing of such additional services. Gross revenues received by the grantee from the furnishing of such services shall be subject to the franchise fee due Columbus, Georgia, under section 20 of this ordinance. 
Section 8. The city may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other service, including but not limited to ancillary charges relating thereto, except as authorized pursuant to federal and state law including, but not limited to, the Cable Communications Policy act of 1984 and FCC Rules and Regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, the grantee has the right to modify its rates and charges, including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however, that the grantee shall give written notice to the Council of Columbus, Georgia, of any such modifications or additional charges 30 days prior to the effective date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, 1-24-89) 
Section 9. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver who has or owns a color television receiver. 
Section 10. Subject to federal, state, and local law, the distribution system of the grantee to be hereafter installed shall not be abandoned either in whole or in part without the consent of the Columbus Council. In the event of the failure of the grantee to render community television service to Columbus, Georgia, and the inhabitants thereof, as contemplated and provided for by this franchise ordinance, and particularly by section 14 contained herein, the Columbus Council shall have the right, on reasonable notice to the grantee, to declare this ordinance and the rights and franchise granted hereunder forfeited; provided, however, failure to comply with these terms by reason of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee which could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of such terms by the grantee, shall not be sufficient grounds to declare a forfeiture. 
Section 11. The grantee shall indemnify, protect, save, and hold harmless Columbus, Georgia, from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under Workmen's Compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within Columbus, Georgia, or by any act of the grantee, its agents or employees. The grantee shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amount of such insurance against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons shall not be less than $500,000.00 as to any one person and not less than $1,000,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence; and against liability due to physical damage to property not less than $500,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence and not less than $1,000,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year. The grantee shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under any Workers' Compensation laws in effect which may be applicable to the grantee. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. A certificate of insurance demonstrating such coverage shall be deposited with and kept on file by the clerk of council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 12. The grantee shall grant to Columbus, Georgia, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the grantee's wires and fixtures, and Columbus, Georgia, shall hold the grantee harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage caused by the placing of its wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the grantee. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
Section 13. Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The franchising authority acknowledges that the financial and technical qualifications of grantee are sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and franchising authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the franchising authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need therefor. The franchising authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than $10,000.00 conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. In the event that such a bond or other surety is required in the future, the franchising authority agrees to give grantee at least 60 days' prior notice thereof stating the exact reason for the same. Such reasons must relate to a change in the grantee's financial or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
Section 14. The grantee agrees to install signal distribution facilities subject to satisfactory pole clearance and pole rental arrangements, to all residents who are subscribers of the system within Columbus, Georgia, with a population density of 35 homes per mile of system or more. The grantee shall not deny access to cable service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
Section 15. The grantee is hereby encouraged to effect interconnection with other state, county, city, regional or national communications systems where practical and beneficial, to the extent permitted by applicable state or federal law. 
Section 16. The grantee will appoint a single point of contact to communicate with Columbus Council or a committee designated by the council or the chairman thereof to review service complaints. In the event the television signal service of the community antenna system should be interrupted or fail by reason of accident or circumstances otherwise beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee shall restore the service within a reasonable time and such interrupted service shall not constitute a breach of this franchise. Any such interruption in excess of 48 hours from notice to the grantee of such interruption of service, shall result in a prorated adjustment of a subscriber's bill for such service upon the subscriber's request, except that such a prorated adjustment shall not be required of the grantee where such interruption is the result of an accident or circumstances otherwise beyond the control of the grantee. 
Section 17. The grantee agrees to provide the Council of Columbus, Georgia, or a committee designated by the council the following: 
A.  Semi-annual statistics including a breakdown as to subscribers of basic service; pay channels; and any pay per view (PPV) programming. 
B.  Right of inspection within 24 hours upon receipt by the grantee of a written request from the council or committee designated by the council, of any part of the grantee's facilities and equipment wherever the same may be located in Columbus, Georgia. 
Section 18. The grantee shall provide free connection and monthly basic service to all occupied government buildings (one outlet), including the central office of the Muscogee County School District, provided said buildings are located within an area served by the grantee's distribution system as described in section 14. 
Section 19. The grantee agrees, upon the receipt of ten days' prior notice from the clerk of council, to attend an annual meeting, or other meetings requested by the council or a committee designated by the council, to discuss the state of the system and provision of cable services. Topics will include, but not be limited to: (a) technical performance—past, present, and future; (b) service—past, present, and future. 
Section 20. In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the grantee, the grantee will pay quarterly to Columbus, Georgia, a franchise fee of five percent of the gross revenues of the grantee, exclusive of installation charges. Payment is due within 90 days of the end of the calendar year. Should the grantee default in the payment of said sums for a period of 30 days or more, then the rights and franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in section 10 of this franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, 1-10-89) 
Section 21. The grantee shall not be authorized to engage in the sale or servicing of television sets or appliances. 
Section 22. In addition to the minimum requirements contained in section 7 above, the grantee agrees to provide channel capacity for public, educational, or governmental use (PEG), to be made available immediately upon any system growth past 20 channels (channels 21 and above, inclusive). Any such unused PEG channel capacity shall be available for grantee use. 
Section 23. This ordinance shall be published, within ten days after its final passage, in the Columbus Ledger-Enquirer, a newspaper of general circulation published in Columbus, Georgia, and shall become effective as provided by law. 
Section 24. It is the stated intention of Columbus, Georgia, that all other holders of public franchise shall cooperate with the grantee to allow the grantee's joint usage of their poles and pole line facilities wherever possible or wherever such usage does not 
interfere with the normal operation of said poles and pole lines, so that the number of additional poles constructed by the grantee may be minimized. 
Section 25. The foregoing provisions, requirements, and conditions are agreed to by the grantee in return for the granting of the franchise by Columbus, Georgia. No change in the operating procedures required by the franchise herein granted shall become effective without the grantee's having given 30 days' advance written notice to the council of such proposed changes. Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of record, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid. 
Introduced at a regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 23rd day of August, 1988; introduced a second time at a regular meeting of said council held on the 30th day of August, 1988, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of ten members of said council. 
FIRST SOUTHERN CABLE GROUP, INC. [10] 
ORDINANCE NO. 88-109 
KMC SOUTHEAST CORP. 
ORDINANCE NO. 95-105 
An ordinance granting a franchise to KMC Southeast Corp., a corporation, its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain and operate a fiber optic transmission cable for the transmission of telephonic data and other electronic messages in, on, and/or across public places or ways and prescribing conditions and limitations. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein unless more specifically defined within other sections of this ordinance. When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the single number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
(1)  Anniversary date shall mean the date on which this franchise is accepted by the grantee. 
(2)  City is the City of Columbus. 
(3)  Dark fiber means unused fiber through which no light is transmitted, or installed fiber optic cable not carrying a signal. 
(4)  Grantee is KMC Southeast Corp. or anyone who succeeds KMC Southeast Corp. in accordance with the provisions of this franchise. 
(5)  Franchise is the authorization, and renewal thereof, issued by the City of Columbus as franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of a fiber optic voice, video and/or data communications transmission system in the streets, alleys, roads, public ways and public places identified in said franchise. 
(6)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, trust, joint stock company, association, corporation, company, governmental entity or organization of any kind. 
(7)  Gross receipts means all revenues (exclusive of sales tax remitted by grantee to the State of Georgia) collected by grantee from operation of grantee's fiber optic network installed pursuant to the franchise and any related services provided by the grantee within the corporate limits of the city including but not limited to: 
a.  All telecommunications services revenues charged on a flat rate basis; 
b.  All telecommunications services charged on a usage sensitive or mileage basis; 
c.  All revenues from installation service charges; 
d.  All revenues from connection or disconnection fees; 
e.  All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks returned from banks; 
f.  All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customer upon customer premises; 
g.  All revenue from local service; 
h.  All revenues from authorized rental of conduit space; 
i.  All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance networks; 
j.  All revenues from authorized rentals of any portion of grantee's network, including plant, facilities, or capacity leased to others; 
k.  All other revenues collected from grantee's business pursued within the city; 
l.  Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from the sale or assignment of bad debts, but excluding unrecovered bad debts charged off after diligent, unsuccessful efforts to collect; 
m.  All revenues from enhanced data service; 
n.  All interconnect revenues from interexchange carriers; 
o.  All revenue derived from co-location connection fees; and 
p.  All revenues from subsidiary companies derived from use of grantee's network. 
(8)  Fiber optic network or network shall mean the grantee's system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, or distributing, by audio, video, or other forms of electronic signals to or from subscribers or locations within the city. No portion of the network shall constitute all or any portion of a cable television system except with the prior written consent of the city. 
(9)  Rights-of-way shall mean all present and future streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(10)  Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Section 2. Consideration. 
The grant of the right, privilege and franchise under this ordinance has been determined to be in the best interests of the citizens of the City of Columbus and shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein. The grantee shall annually pay to the City of Columbus a fee of five percent of gross receipt as defined in this agreement. This fee shall not be in lieu of any other municipal fees or taxes other than the occupation tax. The franchise fee shall be paid to the finance department. Said fee shall be paid quarterly and shall be due within 30 days of the end of each March, June, September and December. Within 60 days of the end of each December the grantee shall also file a notarized statement executed by the grantee's independent certified public accountant, which shall certify the calculation of the gross receipts, uncollectible accounts and the franchise fee for the fiscal year. Said franchise payment and statement shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the due date as specified herein and shall be subject to penalty at a rate of one and one-half percent per calendar month or any portion thereof in which the payments remain delinquent. 
As further consideration of this franchise, the grantee agrees to irrevocably dedicate to the City of Columbus, at no charge, four dark fibers in the grantee's fiber optic network for the city's internal communications, provided, however, that such fibers shall not be used by the city for commercial resale on a for-profit basis. 
Section 3. Grant of Authority and Term. 
(a)  Grant of authority. 
(1)  There is hereby granted, subject to the city's prompt receipt of monetary and services compensation, to grantee the nonexclusive right and privilege to have, acquire, construct, expand, reconstruct, maintain, use and operate in, along, across, on, over, through, above and under the public streets of the city a fiber optics network which shall be limited to audio, video, data, voice and signalling communications services. 
(2)  Grantee shall not provide services directly regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission (the "PSC") under Georgia statutes unless authorized by the PSC. Grantee shall not provide cable services or operate a cable system as defined in the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C.A. Section 521, et seq., as amended) or as recognized by the Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC") without first obtaining a separate cable franchise from the city and shall not allow the use of the network by a cable system that has not been granted a franchise by the city. Grantee shall not provide video dial tone or personal communications service (PCS) without first obtaining a separate franchise from the city. 
(3)  This ordinance is granted to grantee solely for the purpose of directly serving its end-user customers and interexchange carriers. 
(4)  This ordinance does not require grantee to provide ubiquitous service throughout the entire city as a public service provider. Grantee shall provide service only on authorized routes. 
(5)  Nothing herein contained shall ever be held or construed to confer upon grantee, its successors and assigns, exclusive rights or privileges of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Term. This franchise is granted for an initial period of 15 years from and after the date this ordinance is accepted by grantee, as provided in Section 8 hereof. This franchise may be extended beyond such initial term upon application to the city by grantee in accordance with any then-applicable federal, state, and/or local laws. 
Section 4. Conditions of Use. 
(a)  Prior to beginning any work in the rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain from the department of engineering a street cut permit, as well as any other permits or licenses which may be required by the City of Columbus or the State of Georgia for the construction and operation of a fiber optic network. Said construction shall be accomplished under the supervision and direction of the city manager of the City of Columbus, or such officers or employees as the city manager may designate. The grantee shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impair traffic upon the streets, road and other public ways of the City of Columbus. Upon making an opening in any public way, street, sidewalk or road as authorized by this franchise for the purpose of laying, constructing, repairing and/or maintaining said fiber optic network and any related facilities or equipment, the grantee shall, without unnecessary delay, replace and restore same to its former condition as nearly as possible, and in full compliance with the provisions of the city's street cut policy and any other provisions of the City Code of the City of Columbus. The grantee shall re-sod disturbed grassed areas and replace all excavated areas to their original or better condition in order to minimize the disruption of public property. 
(b)  The grantee shall provide safe passageway for pedestrians and vehicles through, in and around the work site areas. Work shall be performed at night, if requested by the city, so as not to impede regular business traffic. The grantee shall use directional boring in all areas where possible unless otherwise required or approved by the city. The grantee shall meet all city and state requirements for traffic control and notify the city at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of work or accessing of the city conduit, except in cases of emergency. 
(c)  The grantee shall file with the city engineer true and correct maps or plats of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and facilities installed or constructed, properly identified and described as to the type of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks and which shall include annotations of all public ways, street, road and conduits where the work is to be undertaken. Maps shall be drawn in a scale which shall allow proper review and interpretation and will be filed no less than ten working days before any installation of said cable or equipment or facilities. 
(d)  If, at any time during the period of this franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to vacate, relocate, abandon, alter, reconstruct or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way to include drainage and utility areas, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. Should grantee refuse or fail to remove its equipment or plant as provided for herein within 45 days after written notifications the City of Columbus shall have the right to do such work or cause it to be done and the full cost thereof shall be chargeable to the grantee, or in the alternative to consider such failure by the grantee to remove its equipment or plant as abandonment of all ownership rights in said property. 
(e)  Grantee shall maintain an office within the city. Grantee shall always keep and maintain city-specific books, records, contracts, accounts, documents and papers or its operation in this office. Additionally, all maps, plats, records, inventories and books of the grantee, insofar as they show values and location of existing property, shall be kept and maintained in this office and preserved for use, if necessary, in connection with any future valuation of the property of the grantee. In lieu of physical custody of the foregoing records in grantee's Columbus office, grantee may hold the records in a corporate office located elsewhere, provided that any and all records which may be requested by employees or agents of the city shall be delivered to grantee's Columbus office and made available to the requestor within five business days from the date requested. For the purposes of this section, the date requested shall be the date a written request is delivered to the grantee's Columbus office, and unaltered photocopies of requested documents may be delivered in lieu of original records. 
(f)  Grantee shall keep the city fully informed as to all matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of grantee's network, grantee's accounting methods and procedures in connection therewith, and the recording and reporting by grantee of all revenues and uncollectible accounts. 
(g)  Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations pursuant to this franchise ordinance in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, subject to approval by the city. If required by the FCC, grantee shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by the FCC in 47 CFR Part 32 of its successor and as may be further described herein. The city may require the keeping of additional records or accounts which are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for and reporting gross receipts and uncollectible accounts for purposes of Section 2, Consideration. Grantee shall keep its books of accounts and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available by type of service within the city. 
(h)  Grantee shall report to the city such other information relating to the grantee as the city may consider useful and shall comply with the city's determination of forms for reports, the time for reports, the frequency with which any reports are to be made, and if reports are to be made under oath. 
(i)  Grantee shall provide the city with access at reasonable times and for reasonable purposes, to examine, audit, review, and/or obtain copies of the papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records of grantee pertaining to this franchise ordinance. Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available its records and otherwise assisting in these activities. 
(j)  The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to grantee's operation of its network within the city. Grantee shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(k)  Grantee shall, upon request, provide the city with copies of notices of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commissions and the PSC, or their successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the use of city streets and rights-of-way and/or the telecommunications operations authorized pursuant to this franchise ordinance. 
Section 5. Safety Requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  The grantee shall install and maintain its network in accordance with the requirements of the building code and applicable regulations of the City of Columbus and the statutes and regulations of appropriate federal and state agencies, including but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission and the Corps of Engineers, which may now be in effect or enacted in and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city. 
(c)  The grantee's network, whichever situated, or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 6. Liability and Indemnification. 
(a)  By acceptance of this franchise and right, grantee agrees that it shall indemnify, protect and hold harmless the City of Columbus and its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims whatsoever, from liabilities, losses, costs, judgments, penalties, damages and expenses, including attorneys' fees, arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance by the grantee of the grantee's fiber optic network, or the failure to perform any of the obligations of this franchise and right, including but not limited to claims for injury or death to any person or persons, or damages to any property, as may be incurred by or asserted against the city, its officers, agents or employees, directly or indirectly, by reason of the installation, operation or maintenance by the grantee of the grantee's fiber optic network within the City of Columbus. 
(b)  The grantee shall pay, and, by acceptance of this franchise, the grantee specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting this franchise. These damages or penalties shall include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising from the installation, operation or maintenance of the fiber optic network authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise, and the city shall not be responsible in any manner for any damage to the fiber optic network of the grantee which may be caused by the city's employees or other persons regardless of the cause of damage. 
(c)  The grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise, specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (b) above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorneys fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any employees of the city. 
(d)  The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise, specifically agrees that it will provide throughout the term of this franchise, workmans' compensation insurance and liability insurance with regard to all damages mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) above in the minimum amounts of: 
a.  General liability insurance—Public liability including premises, products and complete operations. 
1.  Bodily injury liability—$500,000.00 each person, $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
2.  Property damage liability—$1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
3.  Or, in lieu of (1) and (2) above, bodily injury and property damage combined—$1,000,000.00 singe limit. 
b.  Comprehensive—Automobile liability insurance including owned, non-owned and hired vehicles. 
1.  Bodily injury liability—$500,000.00 each person, $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
2.  Property damage liability—$1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
3.  Or, in lieu of (1) and (2) above, bodily injury and property damage combined—$1,000,000.00 singe limit. 
(e)  Grantee agrees that with respect to the above required insurance contracts will contain the following required provisions: 
a.  The city and its officers, agents, employees, board members and elected representatives shall be named as additional insureds (as the interests of each may appear) as to all applicable coverage; 
b.  Contracts shall provide for 30 days' notices to the city prior to cancellation, revocation, nonrenewal or material change; and 
c.  Notice required by this section shall be delivered to the person specified in Section 12 herein by certified mail. 
The amount and conditions of liability and comprehensive insurance may be increased upon 60 days written notice by the city should the protection afforded by this insurance be deemed by the city to be insufficient for the risk created by this franchise. At no time, however, will the amount of required liability and comprehensive insurance exceed that which is customarily required of other franchises or contractors of services for similar situations or risk. Grantee shall furnish a certificate in accordance with paragraph (e) below as proof of insurance. 
(e)[f] The insurance certificate obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section must be approved by the city and shall contain a provision requiring not less than 30 days notice to the city prior to cancellation. 
Section 7. City Rights in Franchise. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct, maintain and operate said fiber optic network in such locations and/or at such depths below the grades of said streets as may be validly required by the City of Columbus, and will at all times comply with all reasonable requirements, regulations, laws and ordinances now in force, and which may hereafter be adopted by said City of Columbus, and be applicable to the construction, repair or maintenance of said fiber optic network or use of city-owned conduit. Failure of the grantee to comply with the terms of this franchise or failure to pay the franchise fees prescribed by this agreement shall be cause for the city to terminate this franchise. The city also reserves the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee: 
a.  Violates any rule, order or determination of the mayor or city council made pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect; 
b.  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its legal debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt; 
c.  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this franchise; 
d.  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; 
e.  Fails to begin construction of its system within 180 days from the date this franchise ordinance is adopted. 
(b)  The city's right to terminate this franchise may be exercised only after written notice of default and a 30-day period for grantee to cure such default. The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations of general application to all similarly situated franchises as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted. 
Section 8. Acceptance. 
This franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted, shall take effect and be in force from and after final enactment, provided that within 60 days after the date of the passage of this ordinance and prior to the commencement of any construction or the laying of any cable, the grantee shall file with the person specified in Section 12 herein its unconditional acceptance of this franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer and accompanied by an insurance certificate as specified in Section 6 unless these documents or evidence thereof have been previously filed with the office of the city clerk. 
Section 9. Transfer of Title. 
(a)  The grantee shall not transfer this franchise to another person without prior approval of the city by resolution, provided, however, that grantee may transfer this franchise without city approval to an affiliate or subsidiary owned more than 51 percent by the grantee or by grantee's parent company, Kamine Multimedia Corp. Moreover, this provision shall not be constructed as requiring city approval of secured financing arrangements. 
(b)  The grantee, without the consent of the city (which shall not be unreasonably withheld), shall not lease or sell any of the rights-of-way, network, plant, facilities or conduit space it uses in connection with its network to any person or entity. 
Section 10. Ordinance Repealed. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Section 11. Separability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
Section 12. Notice. 
For the purpose of giving notice as provided for in this ordinance, the grantee's address is declared to be: 
G. Scott Brodey  Chief Operating Officer  KMC Southeast Corp.  994 Explorer Boulevard  Huntsville, AL 35806 
The City's address shall be:  City Manager  Columbus Consolidated Government  P.O. Box 1340  Columbus, GA 31902 
Unless the city is notified in writing to the contrary, the placing of notices in the United States mail addressed to the grantee as set forth above shall constitute compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Section 13. Adoption. 
By the adoption of this ordinance, the city council of the City of Columbus hereby expressly authorizes the mayor of the City of Columbus to proceed with the implementation of this franchise and to enforce the provisions contained herein. 
Introduced at the regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 24th day of October 1995, introduced a second time at the regular meeting held on the 31st day of October 1995, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of nine members of said council. 
AMERICAN COMMUNICATION SERVICES OF COLUMBUS, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 95-106 
An ordinance granting a franchise to American Communication Services of Columbus, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain and operate a fiber optic transmission cable for the transmission of telephonic data and other electronic messages in, on, and/or across public places or ways and prescribing conditions and limitations. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein unless more specifically defined within other sections of this ordinance. When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the single number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
(1)  Anniversary date shall mean the date on which this franchise is accepted by the grantee. 
(2)  City is the City of Columbus. 
(3)  Dark fiber means unused fiber through which no light is transmitted, or installed fiber optic cable not carrying a signal. 
(4)  Grantee is American Communication Services of Columbus, Inc., or anyone who succeeds American Communication Services of Columbus, Inc., in accordance with the provisions of this franchise. 
(5)  Franchise is the authorization, and renewal thereof, issued by the City of Columbus as franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of a fiber optic voice, video and/or data communications transmission system in the streets, alleys, roads, public ways and public places identified in said franchise. 
(6)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, trust, joint stock company, association, corporation, company, governmental entity or organization of any kind. 
(7)  Gross receipts means all revenues (exclusive of sales tax remitted by grantee to the State of Georgia) collected by grantee from operation of grantee's fiber optic network installed pursuant to the franchise and any related services provided by the grantee within the corporate limits of the city including but not limited to: 
a.  All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate basis; 
b.  All telecommunications services charged on a usage sensitive or mileage basis; 
c.  All revenues from installation service charges; 
d.  All revenues from connection or disconnection fees; 
e.  All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks returned from banks; 
f.  All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customer upon customer premises; 
g.  All revenue from local service; 
h.  All revenues from authorized rental of conduit space; 
i.  All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance networks; 
j.  All revenues from authorized rentals of any portion of grantee's network, including plant, facilities, or capacity leased to others; 
k.  All other revenues collected from grantee's business pursued within the city; 
l.  Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from the sale or assignment of bad debts, but excluding unrecovered bad debts charged off after diligent, unsuccessful efforts to collect; 
m.  All revenues from enhanced data service; 
n.  All interconnect revenues from interexchange carriers; 
o.  All revenue derived from co-location connection fees; and 
p.  All revenues from subsidiary companies derived from use of grantee's network. 
(8)  Fiber optic network or network shall mean the grantee's system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing, by audio, video, or other forms of electronic signals to or from subscribers or locations within the city. No portion of the network shall constitute all or any portion of a cable television system except with the prior consent of the city. 
(9)  Rights-of-way shall mean all present and future streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(10)  Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Section 2. Consideration. 
The grant of the right, privilege and franchise under this ordinance has been determined to be in the best interests of the citizens of the City of Columbus and shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein. The grantee shall annually pay to the City of Columbus a fee of five percent of gross receipts as defined in this agreement. This fee shall not be in lieu of any other municipal fees or taxes other than the occupation tax. The franchise fee shall be paid to the finance department. Said fee shall be paid quarterly and shall be due within 30 days of the end of each March, June, September and December. Within 60 days of the end of each June the grantee shall also file a notarized statement executed by the grantee's independent certified public account, which shall certify the calculation of the gross receipts, uncollectible accounts and the franchise fee for the fiscal year. Said franchise payment and statement shall be considered delinquent if not made within 30 days of the due date as specified herein and shall be subject to penalty at a rate of one and one-half percent per calendar month or any portion thereof in which the payments remain delinquent. 
As further consideration for this franchise, the grantee agrees to irrevocably dedicate to the City of Columbus, at no charge, four dark fibers in the grantee's fiber optic network for the city's internal communications, provided, however, that such fibers shall not be used by the city for commercial resale on a for-profit basis. 
Section 3. Grant of Authority and Term. 
(a)  Grant of authority. 
(1)  There is hereby granted, subject to the city's prompt receipt of monetary and services compensation, to grantee the nonexclusive right and privilege to have, acquire, construct, expand, reconstruct, maintain, use and operate in, along, across, on, over, through, above and under the public streets of the city a fiber optics network which shall be limited to audio, video, data, voice and signaling communications services. 
(2)  Grantee shall not provide services directly regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission (the "PSC") under Georgia statutes unless authorized by the PSC. Grantee shall not provide cable services or operate a cable system as defined in the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C.A. Section 521, et seq., as amended) or as recognized by the Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC") without first obtaining a separate cable franchise from the city and shall not allow the use of the network by a cable system that has not been granted a franchise by the city. Grantee shall not provide video dial tone or personal communications service (PCS) without first obtaining a separate franchise from the city. 
(3)  This ordinance is granted to grantee solely for the purpose of directly serving its end-user customers and interexchange carriers. 
(4)  This ordinance does not require grantee to provide ubiquitous service throughout the entire city as a public service provider. Grantee shall provide service only on authorized routes. 
(5)  Nothing herein contained shall ever be held or construed to confer upon grantee, its successors and assigns, exclusive rights or privileges of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Term. This franchise is granted for an initial period of 15 years from and after the date this ordinance is accepted by grantee, as provided in Section 8 hereof. This franchise may be extended beyond such initial term upon application to the city by grantee in accordance with any then-applicable federal, state, and/or local laws. 
Section 4. Conditions of use. 
(a)  Prior to beginning any work in the rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain from the department of engineering a street cut permit, as well as any other permits or licenses which may be required by the City of Columbus or the State of Georgia for the construction and operation of a fiber optic network. Said construction shall be accomplished under the supervision and direction of the city manager of the City of Columbus, or such officers or employees as the city manager may designate. The grantee shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impair traffic upon the streets, road and other public ways of the City of Columbus. Upon making an opening in any public way, street, sidewalk or road as authorized by this franchise for the purpose of laying, constructing, repairing and/or maintaining said fiber optic network and any related facilities or equipment, the grantee shall, without unnecessary delay, replace and restore same to its former condition as nearly as possible, and in full compliance with the provisions of the city's street cut policy and any other provisions of the City Code of the City of Columbus. The grantee shall re-sod disturbed grassed areas and replace all excavated areas to their original or better condition in order to minimize the disruption of public property. 
(b)  The grantee shall provide safe passageway for pedestrians and vehicles through, in and around the work site areas. Work shall be performed at night, if requested by the city, so as not to impede regular business traffic. The grantee shall use directional boring in all areas where possible unless otherwise required or approved by the city. The grantee shall meet all city and state requirements for traffic control and notify the city at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of work or accessing of the city conduit, except in cases of emergency. 
(c)  The grantee shall file with the city engineer true and correct maps or plats of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and facilities installed or constructed, properly identified and described as to the type of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks and which shall include annotations of all public ways, streets, road and conduits where the work is to be undertaken. Maps shall be drawn in a scale which shall allow proper review and interpretation and will be filed no less than ten working days before any installation of said cable or equipment or facilities. 
(d)  If, at any time during the period of this franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to vacate, relocate, abandon, alter, reconstruct or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way to include drainage and utility areas, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. Should grantee refuse or fail to remove its equipment or plant as provided for herein within 45 days after written notifications the City of Columbus shall have the right to do such work or cause it to be done and the full cost thereof shall be chargeable to the grantee, or in the alternative to consider such failure by the grantee to remove its equipment or plant as abandonment of all ownership rights in said property. 
(e)  Grantee shall maintain an office within the city. Grantee shall always keep and maintain city-specific books, records, contracts, accounts, documents and papers for its operation in this office. Additionally, all maps, plats, records, inventories and books of the grantee, insofar as they show values and location of existing property, shall be kept and maintained in this office and preserved for use, if necessary, in connection with any future valuation of the property of the grantee. In lieu of physical custody of the foregoing records in grantee's Columbus office, grantee may hold the records in a corporate office located elsewhere, provided that any and all records which may be requested by employees or agents of the city shall be delivered to grantee's Columbus office and made available to the requestor within five business days from the date requested. For the purposes of this section, the date requested shall be the date a written request is delivered to the grantee's Columbus office, and unaltered copies of requested original documents may be delivered in lieu of original records. 
(f)  Grantee shall keep the city fully informed as to all matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of grantee's network, grantee's accounting methods and procedures in connection therewith, and the recording and reporting by grantee of all revenues and uncollectible accounts. 
(g)  Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations pursuant to this franchise ordinance in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, subject to approval by the city. If required by the FCC, grantee shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by the FCC in 47 CFR Part 32 of its successor and as may be further described herein. The city may require the keeping of additional records or accounts which are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for and reporting gross receipts and uncollectible accounts for purposes of Section 2, Consideration. Grantee shall keep its books of accounts and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available by type of service within the city. 
(h)  Grantee shall report to the city such other information relating to the grantee as the city may consider useful and shall comply with the city's determination of forms for reports, the time for reports, the frequency with which any reports are to be made, and if reports are to be made under oath. 
(i)  Grantee shall provide the city with access at reasonable times and for reasonable purposes, to examine, audit, review, and/or obtain copies of the papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records of grantee pertaining to this franchise ordinance. Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available its records and otherwise assisting in these activities. 
(j)  The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to grantee's operation of its network within the city. Grantee shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(k)  Grantee shall, upon request, provide the city with copies of notices of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commissions and the PSC, or their successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the use of city streets and rights-of-way and/or the telecommunications operations authorized pursuant to this franchise ordinance. 
Section 5. Safety Requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  The grantee shall install and maintain its network in accordance with the requirements of the building code and applicable regulations of the City of Columbus and the statutes and regulations of appropriate federal and state agencies, including but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission and the Corps of Engineers, which may now be in effect or enacted in and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city. 
(c)  The grantee's network, wherever situated, or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 6. Liability and Indemnification. 
(a)  By acceptance of this franchise and right, grantee agrees that it shall indemnify, protect and hold harmless the City of Columbus and its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims whatsoever, from liabilities, losses, costs, judgments, penalties, damages and expenses, including attorneys' fees, arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance by the grantee of the grantee's fiber optic network, or the failure to perform any of the obligations of this franchise and right, including but not limited to claims for injury or death to any person or persons, or damages to any property, as may be incurred by or asserted against the city, its officers, agents or employees, directly or indirectly, by reason of the installation, operation or maintenance by the grantee of the grantee's fiber optic network within the City of Columbus. 
(b)  The grantee shall pay, and, by acceptance of this franchise, the grantee specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting this franchise. These damages or penalties shall include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising from the installation, operation or maintenance of the fiber optic network authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise, and the city shall not be responsible in any manner for any damage to the fiber optic network of the grantee which may be caused by the city's employees or other persons regardless of the cause of damage. 
(c)  The grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise, specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (b) above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorneys fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any employees of the city. 
(d)  The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise, specifically agrees that it will provide throughout the term of this franchise, workmens' compensation insurance and liability insurance with regard to all damages mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) above in the minimum amounts of: 
a.  General liability insurance-Public liability including premises, products and complete operations. 
1.  Bodily injury liability—$500,000.00 each person, $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
2.  Property damage liability—$1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
3.  Or, in lieu of (1) and (2) above, bodily injury and property damage combined—$1,000,000.00 single limit. 
b.  Comprehensive—Automobile Liability Insurance including owned, non-owned and hired vehicles. 
1.  Bodily injury liability—$500,000.00 each person, $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
2.  Property damage liability—$1,000,000.00 each occurrence; 
3.  Or, in lieu of (1) and (2) above, bodily injury and property damage combined—$1,000,000.00 single limit. 
(e)  Grantee agrees that with respect to the above required insurance contracts will contain the following required provisions: 
a.  The city and its officers, agents, employees, board members and elected representatives shall be named as additional insureds (as the interests of each may appear), as to all applicable coverage; 
b.  Contracts shall provide for 30 days' notices to the city prior to cancellation, revocation, non-renewal or material change; and 
c.  Notice required by this section shall be delivered to the person specified in Section 12 herein by certified mail. 
The amount and conditions of liability and comprehensive insurance may be increased upon 60 days' written notice by the city should the protection afforded by this insurance be deemed by the city to be insufficient for the risk created by this franchise. At no time, however, will the amount of required liability and comprehensive insurance exceed that which is customarily required of other franchises or contractors of services for similar situations of risk. Grantee shall furnish a certificate in accordance with paragraph (e) below as proof of insurance. 
(e)  The insurance certificate obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section must be approved by the city and shall contain a provision requiring not less than 30 days notice to the city prior to cancellation. 
Section 7. City Rights in Franchise. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct, maintain and operate said fiber optic network in such locations and/or at such depths below the grades of said streets as may be validly required by the City of Columbus, and will at all times comply with all reasonable requirements, regulations, laws and ordinances now in force, and which may hereafter be adopted by said City of Columbus, and be applicable to the construction, repair or maintenance of said fiber optic network or use of city-owned conduit. Failure of the grantee to comply with the terms of this franchise or failure to pay the franchise fees prescribed by this agreement shall be cause for the city to terminate this franchise. The city also reserves the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee: 
a.  Violates any rule, order or determination of the mayor or city council made pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect; 
b.  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its legal debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt; 
c.  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this franchise; 
d.  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; 
e.  Fails to begin construction of its system within 180 days from the date this franchise ordinance is adopted. 
(b)  The city's right to terminate this franchise may be exercised only after written notice of default and a 30-day period for grantee to cure such default. The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations of general application to all similarly situated franchises as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted. 
Section 8. Acceptance. 
This franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted, shall take effect and be in force from and after final enactment, provided that within 60 days after the date of the passage of this ordinance and prior to the commencement of any construction or the laying of any cable, the grantee shall file with the person specified in Section 12 herein its unconditional acceptance of this franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer and accompanied by an insurance certificate as specified in Section 6 unless these documents or evidence thereof have been previously filed with the office of the city clerk. 
Section 9. Transfer of Title. 
(a)  The grantee shall not transfer this franchise to another person without prior approval of the city by resolution, provided, however, that grantee may transfer this franchise without city approval to an affiliate or subsidiary owned more than 51 percent by the grantee or by grantee's parent company, American Communication Services, Inc. Moreover, this provision shall not be construed as requiring city approval of secured financing arrangements. 
(b)  The grantee, without the consent of the city (which shall not be unreasonably withheld), shall not lease or sell any of the rights-of-way, network, plant facilities or conduit space it uses in connection with its network to any person or entity. 
Section 10. Ordinance Repealed. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Section 11. Separability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
Section 12. Notice. 
For the purpose of giving notice as provided for in this ordinance, the grantee's address is declared to be: 
Ms. Riley Murphy  Executive Vice President/General Counsel  American Communication Services, Inc.  131 National Business Parkway, Suite 100  Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701  Phone: (301) 617-4215  Facsimile (301) 617-4277 
The city's address shall be: 
City Manager  Columbus Consolidated Government  P.O. Box 1340  Columbus, GA 31902 
Unless the city is notified in writing to the contrary, the placing of notices in the United States mail addressed to the grantee as set forth above shall constitute compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Section 13. Adoption. 
By the adoption of this ordinance, the city council of the City of Columbus hereby expressly authorizes the mayor of the City of Columbus to proceed with the implementation of this franchise and to enforce the provisions contained herein. 
Introduced at the regular meeting of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 24th day of October 1995, introduced a second time at the regular meeting held on the 31st day of October 1995, and adopted at said meeting by the affirmative vote of nine members of said council. 
KNOLOGY OF COLUMBUS, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 99-16 
An ordinance granting to KNOLOGY of Columbus, Inc. A corporation duly organized and validly existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, whose principal place of business is located at Post Office Box 510, 1241 O.G. Skinner Drive, West Point, Georgia 31833 a nonexclusive franchise to occupy and use the streets within the franchise area in order to construct, operate, maintain, upgrade repair and remove the system to provide cable service through the system for a period of ten years and for other purposes. 
THE COUNCIL OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
This AGREEMENT, executed as of the 16th of March, 1999 (the "Effective Date"), by and between Columbus Consolidated Government (hereinafter referred to as the "Franchising Authority"), and KNOLOGY of Columbus, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the "Company"). For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise defined in this Agreement the capitalized terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in Appendix A. 
WITNESSETH: In consideration of the covenants and agreements herein contained, and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties hereby covenant and agree as follows: 
Section 1. Grant of Authority. 
1.1 Grant of Franchise. The franchising authority hereby grants under the Cable Act a nonexclusive franchise (the "franchise") to occupy and use the streets within the franchise area in order to construct, operate, maintain, upgrade, repair and remove the system to provide services through the system, subject to the terms and conditions of this agreement. The franchise only authorizes the company to provide cable service and does not authorize any other services the company shall obtain a separate franchise or other authorization required by the franchising authority to provide services other than cable services in the franchise area, through the communications system or otherwise, to the extent such franchise or authorization is required pursuant to applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. Nor shall such franchise be construed to authorize the license or lease to any person or entity of the right to occupy or use the public rights-of-way for the conduct of any private business unless such person or entity has obtained a franchise or right-of-way agreement from the city for such use. 
The company and franchising authority agree that the federal law at the time of the effective date of this agreement was unclear as to whether Internet service is a cable service under Title VI of the Cable Act or is otherwise subject to regulation pursuant to Title VI. For purposes of this agreement, the parties agree that Internet service shall be deemed a cable service, provided, however, that if subsequent to the effective date of this agreement, a court or a regulatory authority of competent jurisdiction or a federal law or regulation concludes that Internet service is not a cable service and is not otherwise subject to Title VI of the Cable Act, such service shall at such time no longer be considered a cable service under this agreement and shall not be subject to a franchise fee pursuant to this agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event Internet service is determined after the effective date to not be a cable service under Title VI of the Cable Act and not otherwise subject to Title VI, nothing herein shall be deemed as a waiver by the franchising authority of any right to require the company to obtain authorization to provide Internet service or otherwise regulate Internet service, or to collect a franchise fee or other fee on such service, to the extent permitted by applicable law or regulation. 
1.1.1 Certain Actions by the Company Before Execution. Prior to the execution of this agreement, the company has satisfied certain conditions prior to the franchising authority's granting of the renewal of this agreement by delivering to the franchising authority the following: (a) evidence that it has deposited with the clerk of the city a performance bond in the amount of $100,000.00 which shall serve as security for the faithful performance of all terms, conditions and obligations under this agreement and for the purposes of recovering any costs, losses, or damages incurred by the city as a result of the company's failure to perform its obligations pursuant to this agreement (b) evidence that the company has remitted to the franchising authority the amount of $17,600.00 to reimburse the franchising authority in part for the franchise authority's expense incurred in conducting the franchise renewal process; (c) a certificate of liability insurance pursuant to section 10 of this agreement. 
1.2 Term of Franchise. The franchise shall commence upon the effective date and shall expire on the tenth anniversary of that date unless the franchise is renewed or the franchise is sooner terminated pursuant to this agreement by the revocation of the franchise as provided in section 9. Upon termination of the franchise, all rights of the company in the franchise shall cease, and the rights of the franchising authority and the company to the system, or any part thereof, shall be determined as provided in section 9. 
1.3 Renewal. Subject to section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546) and such terms and conditions as may be established by the franchising authority, the franchising authority reserves the right to grant or deny renewal of the franchise. 
1.4 Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this Agreement shall (i) abrogate the right of the franchising authority to perform any public works or public improvements of any description, (ii) be construed as a waiver of any codes or ordinances of the franchising authority or of the franchising authority's right to require the company or any person utilizing the system to secure the appropriate permits or authorizations for such use, or (iii) be construed as a waiver or release of the rights of the franchising authority in and to the streets. In the event that all or part of the streets within the franchise area are eliminated, discontinued and closed, the franchise shall cease with respect to such streets upon the effective date of the final action of the franchising authority with respect thereto. 
Section 2. The System. 
2.1 The System and Its Operations. 
2.1.1 General Obligation. The company shall construct, operate, maintain, and upgrade the system as provided in this agreement. Without limiting the foregoing, the system shall have, throughout the term of this agreement, at least 68 activated downstream video channels on the subscriber network and the other characteristics set forth in Appendix B. [11] 
2.1.2 Testing Procedures; Technical Performance. Throughout the term of this agreement, the company shall operate and maintain the system in accordance with the testing procedures and the technical performance standards of the FCC in effect from time to time. 
2.1.3 Emergency Override. Throughout the term of the franchise, the system shall be installed and operated with an emergency alert system in compliance with the rules of the Federal Communications Commission, provided, however, that, notwithstanding any such FCC regulations, the system shall be configured such that, in the event of a local emergency, as reasonably determined by the franchising authority, the franchising authority shall be able to interrupt, to the extent not prohibited by FCC regulations, audio and video signals distributed over the system for the delivery of appropriate signals necessitated by such emergency. Interruption for the purpose of local emergency override of the cable signal shall constitute an emergency notification tone and a character generated "crawl" across the screen detailing the emergency. The emergency override system will be operated in accordance with rules and regulations issued by the franchising authority as permitted by applicable law. 
2.2 Requirements With Respect to Work on the System. [12] 
2.2.1 General Requirements. The company shall comply with the terms set forth in Appendix C in connection with all work involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade, and removal of the system, in addition to any other requirements or procedures reasonably specified by the franchising authority. All work involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade, and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the franchising authority or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any part of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or within the system, is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then the company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.* 
2.2.2 No Liability to Company or Affiliated Persons. Neither the franchising authority nor its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors shall have any liability to the company or any affiliated person for any liability as a result of or in connection with the protection, breaking through, movement, removal, alteration, or relocation of any part of the system by or on behalf of the company or the franchising authority in connection with any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any change in the grade or line of any street, or the elimination, discontinuation, and closing of any street, as provided in this agreement. The foregoing provision freeing the franchising authority from liability pursuant to this section shall not apply to damages caused by violation of Chapter 25-9 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to notification prior to excavation near underground utilities, as now or hereafter amended. 
2.2.3 Interconnection. Throughout the term of this agreement, the company shall construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system such that it transmits and receives any PEG access channel signals and emergency alert signals to and from any other communications system in the franchise area. The interconnect shall be designed and built such that the transmission of signals between the company's system and another communications system does not result in any significant deterioration in the signal quality. The company shall initiate negotiations with another system or systems in order that technical details can be resolved and that any joint and common costs of interconnection may be shared on an equitable basis. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to require the company to share an operator's cost of extending its communications system to the interconnection point, or to require an operator to share the company's cost of extending its system to such point. 
Section 3. Service Obligations. 
3.1 Service to All Persons. The parties acknowledge that the company is currently providing cable service in the franchise area. With respect to areas within the franchise area which are not being served by any communications system on the date hereof, the company shall make all services distributed over the system available to every dwelling unit within the franchise area reaching the minimum density of at least 25 dwelling units per mile. Service shall be offered to all new homes or previously unserved single dwellings located within 150 feet of company's feeder cable. Service to new subdivisions shall be offered when residences meet the above criteria or are 30 percent inhabited. The company may elect to offer services to areas not meeting the above standards. 
3.2 Programming Services. The company shall offer to all subscribers a diversity of video programming services. 
3.3 No Discrimination. Neither the company nor any affiliated person shall discriminate or permit discrimination between or among any persons in the availability of services. It shall be the right of all persons to receive continuously all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the company are satisfied. 
3.4 Service to Governmental and Institutional Facilities. The company shall provide free connection and monthly basic service tier and cable programming service tiers, as that term is defined in the Cable Act, but not pay-per-view, pay-per-channel programming or the digital tier offered as of the effective date, to all occupied government buildings (one outlet) and any additional facilities opened during the franchise term, including the central office of the Muscogee County School District, provided said buildings are in an area served by the company's distribution system. 
3.5 PEG Access. 
3.5.1 PEG Access. In accordance with section 611 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 531), the company agrees to provide channel capacity to be designated for public, educational or governmental ("PEG") use and related equipment and facilities, services and/or financial support for the development and use of PEG access. The capacity and related equipment and facilities, services and financial support to be provided shall be determined in light of community needs and interests. The terms and conditions of such PEG access channels and related support as agreed upon between the franchising authority and the company shall be attached to this agreement in Appendix G.* In accordance with section 611 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 531), the Franchising Authority may require rules and procedures for the use of PEG capacity and shall prescribe rules and procedures to govern the Company's use of the PEG Channel capacity when it is not in use for PEG access purposes. [13] 
Section 4. Fees and Charges. 
4.1 Rates, Fees and Charges To Be Set Forth in Appendix D. All rates, fees, charges, deposits and associated terms and conditions to be imposed by the company or any affiliated person for any service as of the effective date are set forth in Appendix D.* Before any new or modified rate, fee, charge, deposit or associated term or condition may be imposed, the company must submit to the franchising authority a revised Appendix D reflecting the modification, and notify affected subscribers (which may be by any means permitted under applicable law). Submission of a company rate card which reflects all current rates, fees, charges, deposits and associated terms and conditions will satisfy the requirements of this section. [14] 
4.2 Prohibition Against Discrimination in Fees and Charges. Except to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by applicable law (and after receiving the franchising authority's approval, to the extent such approval may be permitted under applicable law), neither the company nor any affiliated person shall discriminate or permit discrimination between or among any persons in the rates, terms and conditions for any service. 
4.3 Parental Control Devices. Upon the request of a Subscriber, and in accordance with applicable law, the company shall, provide (by sale or lease) to each subscriber, a parental control device by which the subscriber can block completely the video and audio signals of a particular cable service during periods selected by that subscriber. The choice of such device shall be at the subscriber's election, to the extent permissible under applicable law, and shall be delivered in the shortest period permissible under applicable law after the subscriber's request. 
4.4 Franchising Authority's Regulation of Fees and Charges. The franchising authority reserves the right to regulate the rates, fees, charges, deposits and associated terms and conditions for any service provided pursuant to this agreement to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, including but not limited to FCC rules regarding effective competition of cable systems within the same franchise area, and the franchising authority may establish rules and regulations in connection therewith from time to time. In connection with such regulation, the franchising authority shall comply with FCC rules and provide the public with an opportunity to comment if such opportunity is consistent with FCC rules. 
Section 5. Consumer Protection and Customer Service; Subscriber Bills; and Privacy Protection. 
5.1 Customer Service and Consumer Protection Standards. 
5.1.1 Company To Comply With Standards provided Under FCC Rules. The Company shall comply in all respects with the requirements set forth in Appendix E* and the customer service requirements established by the FCC pursuant to section 632(b) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C.  § 552(b)). [15] 
5.2 Subscriber Bills. 
5.2.1 Bill Format Generally. Subscriber bills shall be designed in such a way as to present the information contained therein clearly and comprehensibly to subscribers, and in a way that (i) is not misleading, (ii) does not omit material information, and (iii) does not mischaracterize any information. The company may itemize costs on subscriber bills, to the extent permitted by section 622C of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C.§ 542(c)) and the FCC's rules thereunder. 
5.3 Privacy Protection. 
5.3.1 Company To Protect Privacy. The company shall comply with applicable law regarding the protection of privacy, including, without limitation, section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C.§ 551) and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
5.3.2 Company To Provide Certain Information To Franchising Authority. The company shall cooperate with the franchising authority so as to ensure the franchising authority's ability to enforce the terms and conditions of this agreement to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. 
Section 6. Compensation and Other Payments. 
6.1 Compensation to the Franchising Authority. As compensation for the franchise, the company shall pay, or cause to be paid, to the franchising authority the amounts set forth in this section 6.1. 
6.1.1 Franchise Fees—Amount. The company shall pay to the franchising authority franchise fees in the maximum amount permitted by applicable law, but in no event for any 12-month period shall the franchise fee be less than an amount equal to five percent of gross revenue derived during such period from the operation of the system to provide cable services. 
6.1.2 Franchise Fees—Payment. All such payments of franchise fees shall be made on a quarterly basis and shall be remitted simultaneously with the submission of the company's quarterly report required pursuant to section 6.1.3. 
6.1.3 Company To Submit Franchise Fee Report. The company shall submit to the franchising authority a report, in the form provided in Appendix F, not later than 30 days after the last day of each March, June, September, and December throughout the term of this Agreement setting forth the Gross Revenue for the quarter ending on said last day. [16] 
6.1.4 Franchise Fee Payments Subject to Audit; Remedy for Underpayment. No acceptance of any franchise fee payment by the franchising authority shall be construed as an accord and satisfaction that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount or a release of any claim that the franchising authority may have for further or additional sums payable under this agreement, and all amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the franchising authority. 
If, as a result of such audit or any other review, the franchising authority determines that the company has underpaid its fees in any 12-month period by ten percent or more, then, in addition to making full payment of the relevant obligation, the company shall reimburse the franchising authority for all of the reasonable costs associated with the audit or review, including all reasonable out-of-pocket costs for attorneys, accountants, and other consultants. 
6.1.5 Franchise Fee Modification. Notwithstanding the foregoing section 6.1.1, in the event that the City, after the effective date, amends or renews any franchise fee provision in any franchise agreement or ordinance applicable to a person operating a cable system in the franchise area on the effective date such that (a) such person pays more or less than five percent of its gross revenues as franchise fees or (b) such person pays franchise fees based on a definition of gross revenue which is more or less favorable than the gross revenue definition under this agreement (collectively, "franchise fee formula"), and the city has not granted such person a more favorable franchise fee formula than the formula under this agreement in return for other compensation or in-kind benefits such that the franchise fee formula and such compensation or in-kind benefits collectively are, on balance, equivalent to the payments by the company under section 6.1.1, then, upon the request of either the Franchising authority or the company, the franchising authority and the company shall enter into good faith negotiations to, and shall modify, section 6.1.1 of this Agreement to impose a franchise fee on the company which is no more or less favorable than the franchise fee formula. 
6.2 Payments Not To Be Set Off Against Taxes or Vice Versa. The parties agree that the compensation and other payments to be made pursuant to this section 6 and any other provision of this agreement are not a tax and are not in the nature of a tax and are in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability or other fees or charges (including any fees or charges which may be imposed on the company for the use of poles, conduits or similar facilities that may be owned or controlled by the franchising authority) which the company or any affiliated person shall be required to pay to the franchising authority. 
6.3 Interest on Late Payments. If any payment required by this agreement is not actually received by the franchising authority on or before the applicable date fixed in this agreement or by the franchising authority, the company shall pay interest thereon, from the due date to the date paid at a rate of one percent per month, compounded daily, for the period of delinquency. 
6.4 Continuing Obligation. In the event the company continues to operate all or any part of the system after the term of this agreement, then the company shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this agreement, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions of this agreement, throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of this agreement or the franchise. 
Section 7. Oversight and Regulation. 
7.1 Franchising Authority's Right of Oversight. The franchising authority shall have the right to oversee, regulate, and periodically inspect the construction, operation, maintenance and upgrade of the system, and all parts thereof, in accordance with the provisions of this agreement and applicable law, including the franchising authority's police power. 
7.2 Reports. At the request of the franchising authority, the company shall promptly submit to the franchising authority such information as the franchising authority may request regarding the company, its compliance with any term or condition of this agreement, with respect to the system or its operation, any service distributed over the system, or any activity or function associated with the production or distribution of any service over the system. 
7.3 Company To Maintain Books, Records and Files. 
7.3.1 Books and Records. Throughout the term of the agreement, the company shall maintain in the franchise area, or make available in the franchise area within 30 business days, complete and accurate books of account and records regarding the company's ownership and operation of the system and the provision of services over the system, in a manner reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, including without limitation, books of account and records adequate to enable the company to demonstrate that it is, and throughout the term of this agreement has been, in compliance with this agreement. All such documents pertaining to financial matters which may be the subject of an audit by the franchising authority shall be retained by the company for a minimum of two years following termination of this agreement. 
7.3.2 File for Public Inspection. Throughout the term of this agreement, the company shall maintain, in a file available for public inspection during normal business hours, in the franchise area, those documents required pursuant to the FCC's rules and regulations. 
7.3.3 Performance Evaluation. Upon the franchising authority's request, but not prior to two years after the effective date and not more frequently than every two years, the company shall prepare a status presentation, to provide information to the franchising authority regarding system performance, customer service satisfaction, and future system and programming planning. If on evaluating the status presentation contents, the franchising authority determines that additional information is needed to complete the evaluation, the company shall provide additional relevant data. 
Should the franchise authority determine that, based on the presentation and additional information presented, if any, and expressed community concerns, that cable service or customer service do not meet the standards set forth in this agreement, then the franchising authority may administer the remedies as provided for in section 9 of this agreement. 
7.4 Franchising Authority's Rights of Inspection and Audit. 
7.4.1 Right of Inspection—General. Upon notice to the company, the franchising authority or its designated representatives, shall have the right to examine, in the franchise area, all books and records pertaining to the company's or any affiliated person's ownership or operation of the system or to the company's or affiliated person's provision of services over the system. Further, during normal business hours and upon notice to the company, the franchising authority or its designated representatives may inspect and examine any other aspect of the system, including facilities and equipment thereof. 
7.4.2 Treatment of Proprietary Information. Access by the franchising authority to any of the documents, records or other information covered by this section shall not be denied by the company on grounds that such documents, records or information are alleged by the company to contain proprietary information, provided that this requirement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of the company's right to assert that the proprietary information contained in such documents, records or other information, should not be disclosed and to withhold such information upon the agreement of the franchising authority. If the responsible franchising official concurs with the company's assertion regarding the proprietary nature of such information, the franchising authority will not disclose such information to any person, unless required by applicable law or order of governmental authority. If the responsible franchising official does not concur with such assertion, then the company may appeal such decision to the appropriate individuals or bodies within the franchising authority in accordance with applicable laws and procedures. If the franchising authority does not concur with the company's assertion, or if the company does not appeal, then the company shall promptly provide such documents, including the alleged proprietary portion thereof, to the franchising authority, provided that the company shall not be required to provide the proprietary portion thereof during the pendency of any court challenge to such provision. 
7.4.3 Franchising Authority May Conduct Compliance Audit and Hearings. The franchising authority may conduct a full compliance audit and hold public hearings at any time during the term of the franchise, provided it gives the company written notice 10 days in advance of the commencement of such audits and associated hearings. 
Section 8. Restrictions Against Assignments and Other Transfers. 
8.1 Transfer of Franchise or Interest Therein. Neither the company nor any other person may transfer the franchise or any of the company's rights or obligations in or regarding the system or the franchise without the prior written consent of the franchising authority which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld nor unreasonably delayed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prior consent of the franchising authority shall not be required with respect to solely intra corporate reorganizations between or among entities wholly owned or wholly controlled by KNOLOGY Holdings, Inc., provided that KNOLOGY Holdings Inc., or such entity that acquires control agrees to be fully bound by the terms and conditions of this franchise agreement and that the change does not materially affect the management, day to day operations or financial condition of the company. The company shall notify the franchising authority in writing of any such transfer not requiring consent and provide justification as to why consent is not required at least 30 days prior to such transfer. 
8.2 Transfer of Control. No change in control of the company, the system or the franchise shall occur after the effective date, by act of the company or any affiliated person, by act of any person holding control of the company, the system or the franchise, by operation of law, or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the franchising authority the franchising authority's consent shall not be unreasonably withheld nor unreasonably delayed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prior consent of the franchising authority shall not be required with respect to solely intra corporate reorganizations between or among entities wholly owned or wholly controlled by KNOLOGY Holdings, Inc., provided that KNOLOGY Holdings Inc., or such entity that acquires control agrees to be fully bound by the terms and conditions of this franchise agreement and that the change does not materially affect the management, day to day operations or financial condition of the company. The company shall notify the franchising authority in writing of any such transfer not requiring consent and provide justification as to why consent is not required at least 30 days prior to such transfer. 
8.3 Procedures. Any request for approval shall be handled by the franchising authority in accordance with its customary rules and procedures. Consistent with section 617 of the Cable Act and with regulations of the FCC, in connection with any request for approval, the franchisee shall submit to the franchising authority a completed FCC Form 394, Application For Franchising Authority Consent to Assignment or Transfer of Control of Cable Television Franchise and such other evidence of the proposed transferee's legal, technical and financial qualifications as may be in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and such other information as the franchising authority may reasonably request. A franchising authority shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and any other information as the franchising authority may reasonably request. 
8.4 Financing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the company may make, execute or enter into any collateral assignment with a financial institution for the purpose of creating and perfecting a security interest in its right, title and interest in and to the system for financing purposes without prior approval of the franchising authority; provided however, that the secured party under any collateral assignment may not exercise any right or remedy thereunder (including, without limitation, the remedy of foreclosure) that would have the effect of selling, transferring, leasing, assigning or disposing of the system without the prior written consent of the franchising authority obtained pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section 8. 
Section 9. Specific Rights and Remedies. 
9.1 Not Exclusive. The company agrees that the franchising authority shall have the specific rights and remedies set forth in this section 9. These rights and remedies are in addition to any and all other rights or remedies, now or hereafter available to the franchising authority to enforce the provisions of this agreement, and will not be deemed waived by the exercise of any other right or remedy. The exercise of any such right or remedy by the franchising authority shall not release the company from its obligations or any liability under this agreement, except as expressly provided for in this agreement or as necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payments by the company. 
9.2 Liquidated Damages. Should the franchising authority suffer damage from any substantial or persistent breach by the company of this agreement, which damage may be difficult to quantify, the franchising authority and the company agree to the following schedule of liquidated damages: 
(i)  For material failure to provide data, documents, reports or information in a timely manner as provided by this agreement, company shall pay $200.00 a day, or part thereof, that each violation occurs or continues. 
(ii)  For failure to comply with any other provision of this agreement, company shall pay $200.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance occurs or continues. 
9.3 Events of Default. 
9.3.1 Grounds. The company agrees that an event of default shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following acts or failures to act by the company or any affiliated person: 
(i)  Any substantial failure to comply with any material provision of this agreement that is not cured within the time period provided for in section 9.2.2; 
(ii)  The imminent foreclosure or other similar judicial or nonjudicial sale of all or any material part of the system; 
(iii)  The condemnation by a public authority other than the franchising authority, or sale or dedication under threat or in lieu of condemnation, of all or any part of the system, the effect of which would materially frustrate or impede the ability of the company to carry out its obligations, and the purposes of this agreement; 
(iv)  In the event that an abandonment has occurred; 
(v)  If there shall occur any denial, forfeiture or revocation by any federal, state or local governmental authority of any authorization required by law or the expiration without renewal of any such authorization, and such events either individually or in the aggregate, materially jeopardize the system or its operation; 
(vi)  A persistent failure by the company, its affiliated persons or its guarantor(s), as applicable, to comply with any of the provisions, terms or conditions of this agreement or with any rules, regulations, orders or other directives of the franchising authority after having received repeated notice of a failure to comply and an opportunity to cure such noncompliance in accordance with subsection 9.2.2; or; 
(vii)  The company fails to comply with any of the actions described in sections 8.1 and 8.2, which require prior express written consent of the franchising authority. 
9.3.2 Breach Procedures. The franchising authority shall exercise the rights provided in section 9.3.3 in accordance with the procedures set forth below: 
(i)  The responsible franchising official shall notify the company, in writing, of an alleged event of default, which notice shall specify the alleged event of default with reasonable particularity. The company shall, within 30 days after receipt of such notice or such longer period of time as the responsible franchising official may specify in such notice, either cure such alleged event of default or, in a written response to the responsible franchising official, either present facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged event of default or state that such alleged event of default will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
(ii)  The responsible franchising official shall determine (A) whether an event of default has occurred; (B) whether such event of default is excusable; and (C) whether such event of default has been cured or will be cured by the company. Such determination by the responsible franchising official shall be conveyed to the company in writing. 
(iii)  If the responsible franchising official determines that an event of default has occurred and that such event of default is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by the company in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the responsible franchising official, which schedule shall be at least 30 days, then the responsible franchising official shall prepare a written report which may recommend the action to be taken by the franchising authority's governing body. The franchising authority shall provide notice and a copy of such report to the company. Within 15 days after receipt of such report from the franchising authority, the company may request, in writing, an opportunity to respond to such report before the franchising authority or its agent. Any hearings process associated therewith that the franchising authority may choose to hold shall be commenced within 60 days of the receipt of the request therefore and the franchising authority shall render a decision within a reasonable time after the conclusion of any such hearing. 
(iv)  In the event that the franchising authority's governing body determines that such event of default has not occurred, or that such event of default either has been or will be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the franchising authority's governing body, or that such event of default is excusable, such determination shall conclude the investigation. 
(v)  If the franchising authority's governing body determines that such event of default has occurred, and that such event of default has not been and will not be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the franchising authority's governing body, and that such event of default is not excusable, then the franchising authority may take any of the actions provided in section 9.3.3. Nothing in this section 9.3.2, shall be interpreted to restrict any rights the company may have to appeal such determination under applicable law. 
9.3.3 Franchising Authority Action Upon Occurrence of Event of Default. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, which has not been cured pursuant to section 9.3.2, then, in accordance with the procedures provided in section 9.3.3, the franchising authority may, at any time during the term of this agreement: 
(i)  Require the company to take such actions as the franchising authority deems reasonably appropriate in the circumstances; and/or 
(ii)  Seek money damages from the company as compensation for such event of default; except that the company shall not be subject to money damages for an event of default under section 9.3.1 (iii) or (v) if such event of default was not the result of any act or failure to act by the company or any affiliated person; and/or 
(iii)  Revoke the franchise by termination of this agreement pursuant to this section 9 in a manner affording due process except that such revocation shall not be a remedy for an event of default under section 9.3.1(vi), if such event of default involves a persistent failure to comply with any of the nonmaterial provisions, terms or conditions of this agreement, or with any nonmaterial rules, regulations, orders or other directives of the franchising authority, provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the franchising authority from pursuing any other remedies for such an event of default. 
(iv)  Nothing in this subsection 9.3.3 shall be interpreted to restrict any rights the company may have to appeal the franchising authority's actions under applicable law. 
9.4 Termination. In the event of any termination of this agreement, whether by expiration, revocation or otherwise, the franchising authority may: (i) direct the company to cooperate with the franchising authority or third party in maintaining continuity in the distribution of services to subscribers over the system for a period of up to three months or (ii) order the company to cease all construction and operational activities in a prompt and workmanlike manner. 
9.5 Franchising Authority's Right To Order Removal or To Acquire or Effect a Transfer of the System. 
9.5.1 Removal. In addition to its rights under section 9.3, upon any termination, the franchising authority may issue a removal order directing the company to remove, at the company's sole cost and expense, all or any portion of the system from all streets and other public or nonpublic property within the franchise area, subject to the following: 
(i)  In removing the system, or any part thereof, the company shall, at its own expense, refill and compact any excavation it makes, and shall leave the streets and other property, including utility cables, wires and attachments, in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the company's removal of the system; 
(ii)  The liability insurance and indemnity provisions of this agreement shall remain in full force and effect during the period in which the system is being removed and the associated repairs to the streets and other property are being made; and 
(iii)  If in the reasonable judgment of the franchising authority, the company fails to substantially complete removal, including repair of the streets and other property within 12 months of the franchising authority's issuance of a removal order, the franchising authority shall have the right to: (A) authorize removal of the system, at the company's cost, by another person; and (B) declare that all rights, title and interest to the system belong to the franchising authority, including any portion of the system not designated for removal, without compensation to the company. The company shall execute and deliver such documents as the franchising authority may request, to evidence such ownership by the franchising authority. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the company may dispose of any portion of the system not designated by the franchising authority for removal during such 12-month period, provided, however, that if the company fails to complete the removal of the portion(s) of the system designated for removal by the franchising authority within such period, then all such portion(s) of the system not disposed of and all amounts collected for any portion(s) of the system disposed of by the company during such period shall belong to the franchising authority, with no price due to the company. 
9.5.2 Acquisition or Transfer. Upon any termination and as an alternative to ordering removal of the system, the franchising authority may permit the company to operate the system on terms and conditions equitable to the company and franchising authority for a period of nine months in order to assure the continuation of cable services to subscribers. During the first three months of such nine-month period, the company agrees that it will pursue, in good faith, the sale of the system to another cable operator reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority. The franchising authority agrees that, in good faith, it will negotiate a franchise agreement with an operator reasonably acceptable to it, or consider a request to assign this agreement to such operator; provided, however, nothing herein shall be interpreted to require the franchising authority to enter into a franchise agreement with such operator or to consent to an assignment of this agreement to the operator. If at the end of the three-month period the company has not sold the system in accordance with this section 9.6.2, the company shall continue to operate the system for the remaining six months of the nine-month period, and the franchising authority may acquire ownership of the system or effect a transfer of ownership to a third party in accordance with section 627 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Sec. 547), or order removal of the system at the end of the nine-month period in accordance with section 9.6.1. 
9.5.3 Price. The price to be paid to the company upon an acquisition or transfer by the franchising authority pursuant to section 9.4.2 shall be pursuant to section 627 of the Cable Act. 
9.6 Company's Obligations. In the event of any acquisition, transfer or abandonment pursuant to section 9.4, the company shall promptly supply the franchising authority or third person with all records necessary to reflect the change in ownership and to operate and maintain the system. 
9.7 Performance Bond. 
9.7.1 Establishment. To ensure the performance of the company under this agreement, the company shall arrange for a performance bond solely for the protection of the franchising authority, with a corporate surety or trust company reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority. A copy of the executed performance bond shall be delivered to the franchising authority prior to the execution of this agreement. 
9.7.2 Amount. The performance bond shall be in the face amount of not less than $100,000.00. Such bond shall remain in effect throughout the term of this agreement or such later date as provided in this agreement. 
9.7.3 Withdrawals from the Performance Bond. The franchising authority may make withdrawals from the performance bond, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the performance bond: (i) upon the occurrence of an act of default by company, as defined in section 9.3.1 of this agreement; (ii) to indemnify the franchising authority and serve as security for any expenditure, damage, loss, or costs incurred by the franchising authority as a result of an act of default by the company, as defined in section 9.3.1 of this agreement; or (iii) upon the occurrence of an event listed in section 9.2 of this agreement which leads to the imposition of non-performance penalties upon the company. Prior to making any withdrawals from the performance bond, the franchising authority shall give the company at least seven days advance written notice of its intent to make a withdrawal from the performance bond. Withdrawals from the performance bond shall not be deemed a cure of any default(s) that led to the withdrawal. The franchising authority may not seek recourse against the performance bond for any costs or damages for which the franchising authority has previously been compensated through a withdrawal from the performance bond or otherwise by the company. 
9.7.4 Notice of Withdrawals. Within one week after a withdrawal from the performance bond, the franchising authority shall notify the company in writing of the date and amount of the withdrawal. The withdrawal of amounts from the performance bond shall constitute a credit against the amount of the applicable liability of the company to the franchising authority, but only to the extent of said withdrawal. 
9.7.5 Replenishment. Within 30 days after receipt of notice from the franchising authority that an amount has been withdrawn from the performance bond, the company shall restore the performance bond to the amount specified in section 1.1.1 of this agreement. If the company fails to restore the performance bond within such 30-day period, interest on the unrestored amount shall accrue at the rate specified in section 6.3 of this agreement, from the first day after the end of the aforesaid 30-day period until the performance bond is restored. The franchising authority may periodically withdraw such interest from the performance bond up to the date on which the company makes the required restoration, unless company has paid such interest to the franchising authority. 
9.7.6 Form. The performance bond shall be in a form and content reasonably approved by the franchising authority and shall be furnished to the franchising authority on or before the date set forth in section 1.1.1. The performance bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the surety until at least 90 days prior written notice to the franchising authority of surety's intention to cancel or not renew this bond." 
9.7.7 Not a Limit on Liability. The obligation to perform and the liability of the company pursuant to this agreement shall not be limited by the franchising authority's acceptance of the performance bond required by this section 9. 
Section 10. Insurance and Indemnity. 
10.1 Insurance. 
10.1.1 Specifications. 
(a)  Liability Insurance. Throughout the term of this agreement, the company shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain a liability insurance policy or policies that are in an acceptable form to the franchising authority, together with evidence acceptable to the franchising authority demonstrating that the premiums for said policy or policies have been paid. Such policy or policies shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the franchising authority. Such companies must carry a rating by Best of not less than "A". Such policy or policies shall insure (i) the company and (ii) the franchising authority and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) against each and every form of liability of the company referred to in this agreement in the minimum combined amount of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit the company from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations, provided that the franchising authority, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by the company. 
(b)  Workers' Compensation. The company shall ensure its compliance with the Georgia Workers' Compensation Act and in that regard shall secure insurance to cover its obligations with respect to workers' compensation claims, or take other appropriate steps, which insurance and steps shall be in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the franchising authority. The company shall indemnify and hold harmless the franchising authority from any workers' compensation claims to which the company may become subject during the term of this agreement. 
10.1.2 Maintenance. The liability insurance policies required by this section 10.1.1 shall be maintained by the company throughout the term of this agreement and such other period of time during which the company operates or is engaged in the removal of the system. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the franchising authority, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." Within 60 days after receipt by the franchising authority of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the company shall obtain and furnish to the franchising authority replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority. 
10.1.3 Increased Insurance Coverage. In the event of any changed circumstances following the effective date, if the franchising authority wishes to alter the minimum limitation of the liability insurance policy or policies required in this section 10.1, then the franchising authority and the company shall negotiate such alteration in good faith. 
10.1.4 Liability Not Limited. The legal liability of the company and any affiliated person to the franchising authority and any person for any of the matters which are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this section 10.1, including, without limitation, the company's indemnification obligations set forth in this agreement, shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by the company. 
10.2 Liability and Indemnity. 
10.2.1 No Liability for Damages. In accordance with section 635A of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 555a), the franchising authority, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall have no liability to the company, arising from the regulation of cable service or from a decision of approval or disapproval with respect to a grant, renewal, transfer, or amendment of a franchise. Any relief to the extent such relief is required by any other provision of federal, state, or local law, shall be limited to injunctive relief and declaratory relief. 
10.2.2 Indemnification of the Franchising Authority. Except for acts of willful misconduct by the city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors, the company and each affiliated person shall: (i) defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the franchising authority, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities, special, incidental, consequential, punitive, and all other damage, cost, and expense (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with: (a) the award of this franchise; (b) the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal by the company or its contractors, agents or affiliates of, or any other action or event by the company or its contractors, agents or affiliates with respect to, the system or any activity or function associated with the production or distribution of any service over the system; or (c) the distribution of any service over the system; and (ii) cooperate with the franchising authority, by providing such nonfinancial assistance as may be requested by the franchising authority, in connection with any claim arising out of or in connection with the selection of franchisees for, or the negotiation or award of, this agreement. 
Section 11. Miscellaneous. 
11.1 Controlling Authorities. This agreement is made with the understanding that its provisions are controlled by the Cable Act, other federal laws, state laws, and all applicable locals laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
11.2 Appendices. The appendices to this agreement,* attached hereto, and all portions thereof and exhibits thereto, are, except as otherwise specified in such appendices, incorporated herein by reference and expressly made a part of this agreement. [17] 
11.3. Nonexclusive Franchise. The franchise is nonexclusive. Nothing in this agreement shall affect the right of the franchising authority to grant to any person, or to itself, a franchise, consent, or right to occupy and use the streets, or any part thereof, for the construction, operation, or maintenance of all or any part of a communications system within the franchise area or for any other purpose. 
11.4 Enforceability of Agreement; No Opposition. By execution of this agreement, the company pledges it will not assert in any manner at any time or in any forum that the terms and conditions of this agreement, the franchise, or the processes and procedures pursuant to which this agreement was entered into and the franchise was granted are not valid or are not consistent with the applicable law in existence on the effective date. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as a waiver by the company of any rights it might have under any new federal or state law enacted after the effective date. 
11.5 Entire Agreement. This agreement, including all appendices, embodies the entire understanding and agreement of the franchising authority and the company with respect to the subject matter hereof and merges and supersedes all prior representations, agreements, and understandings, whether oral or written, between the franchising authority and the company with respect to the subject matter hereof, including, without limitation, all prior drafts of this agreement and any appendix to this agreement and any and all written or oral statements or representations by any official, employee, agent, attorney, consultant or independent contractor of the franchising authority or the company. All ordinances or parts of ordinances or other agreements between the company and the city that are in conflict with the provisions of this agreement are hereby declared invalid and superseded. 
11.6 Notices. All notices shall be in writing and shall be sufficiently given and served upon the other party by first class mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and addressed as follows: 
THE FRANCHISING AUTHORITY: 
Columbus Consolidated Government  Office of the City Manager  PO Box 1340  Columbus, Georgia 31902-1340 
WITH A COPY TO: 
Columbus Consolidated Government  Finance Department  Office of the Finance Director  PO Box 1340  Columbus, Georgia  31902-1340 
COMPANY: 
KNOLOGY of Columbus, Inc.  PO Box 510  West Point, Georgia  31833 
11.7 Additional Representations and Warranties. In addition to the representations, warranties, and covenants of the company to the franchising authority set forth elsewhere herein, the company represents and warrants to the franchising authority and covenants and agrees (which representations, warranties, covenants and agreements shall not be affected or waived by any inspection or examination made by or on behalf of the franchising authority) that, as of the effective date: 
11.7.1 Organization, Standing and Authorization. The company is a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the State of Delaware and is duly authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and in the franchise area. 
11.7.2 Compliance with Law. The company is in substantial compliance with all laws, ordinances, decrees and governmental rules and regulations applicable to the system and has obtained all government licenses, permits, and authorizations necessary for the operation and maintenance of the system. 
11.8 Maintenance of System in Good Working Order. Until the termination of this agreement and the satisfaction in full by the company of its obligations under this agreement, in consideration of the franchise, the company agrees that it will maintain all of the material properties, assets and equipment of the system, and all such items added in connection with any upgrade, in good repair and proper working order and condition throughout the term of this agreement. 
11.9 Binding Effect. This agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted transferees and assigns. All of the provisions of this agreement apply to the company, its successors, and assigns. 
11.10 No Waiver, Cumulative Remedies. No failure on the part of the franchising authority or the company to exercise, and no delay in exercising, any right or remedy hereunder including, without limitation, the rights and remedies set forth in section 9 of this agreement, shall operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right or remedy preclude any other right or remedy, all subject to the conditions and limitations established in this agreement. The rights and remedies provided herein including, without limitation, the rights and remedies set forth in section 9 of this agreement, are cumulative and not exclusive of any remedies provided by law, and nothing contained in this agreement shall impair any of the rights or remedies of the franchising authority under applicable law, subject in each case to the terms and conditions of this agreement. 
11.11 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this agreement is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
11.12 No Agency. The company shall conduct the work to be performed pursuant to this agreement as an independent contractor and not as an agent of the franchising authority. 
11.13 Governing Law. This agreement shall be deemed to be executed in the City of Columbus, State of Georgia, and shall be governed in all respects, including validity, interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of Georgia, as applicable to contracts entered into and to be performed entirely within that state. 
11.14 Survival. All representations and warranties contained in this agreement shall survive the term of the agreement. 
11.15 Claims Under Agreement. The franchising authority and the company, agree that, except to the extent inconsistent with section 635 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 555), any and all claims asserted by or against the franchising authority arising under this Agreement or related thereto shall be heard and determined either in a court of the United States ("federal court") located in Georgia or in a court of the State of Georgia of appropriate jurisdiction. To effectuate this agreement and intent, the company agrees that if the franchising authority initiates any action against the company in federal court or in a Georgia court, service of process may be made on the company through registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to the company's agent for service of process as registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's Office. 
11.16 Modification. Except as otherwise provided in this agreement, any appendix to this agreement, or applicable law, no provision of this agreement nor any appendix to this agreement, shall be amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument, in writing, duly executed by the franchising authority and the company, which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the franchising authority through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by the franchising authority, as required by applicable law. 
11.17 Police Power. The franchising authority expressly reserves the right to exercise the full scope of its municipal powers, including both its police power and contracting authority, to promote the public interest and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Columbus Consolidated Government. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the party of the first part, by its city manager, thereunto duly authorized by the city council of said franchising authority, has caused the corporate name of said franchising authority to be hereunto signed and the corporate seal of said franchising authority to be hereunto affixed and the company, the party of the second part, by its officers thereunto duly authorized, has caused its name to be hereunto signed and its seal to be hereunto affixed as of the date and year first above written. 
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY: 
Columbus Consolidated Government  By  Name:  Title: City Manager 
(Seal) 
Attest: 
CABLE COMPANY: 
KNOLOGY of Columbus, Inc.  By  Name: Felix L. Boccucci, Jr.  Title: Vice President 
(Seal) 
Attest: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In that the ordinances contained herein constitute franchises, which might be considered bi-partisan, they have been included without change. 
 --- (2) --- 
Editor's note— For annual tax on the carrying of such businesses, see the current general tax ordinance, which ordinance is not included in this Code. 
 --- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-230, adopted November 7, 1966, amended Ord. No. 64-91, § 10, by inserting the phrase "on or before the 7th day of December, 1968," in place of "within the period of two years from the effective date of this ordinance." 
 --- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 70-12, adopted Jan 12, 1970, which granted a community antenna system franchise to Telecable of Columbus Inc., for a period of twenty-five years, was deleted by the editor and Ord. No. 91-112, renewing the franchise, was included in lieu thereof. Ordinance No. 70-12 had been amended by Ord. No. 76-99, §§ 1—3, adopted July 27, 1976; Ord. No. 77-65, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 1977; and Ord. No. 78-45, § 1, adopted May 2, 1978. 
 --- (5) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to the title of this franchise agreement. 
 --- (6) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote the title of this franchise agreement. 
 --- (7) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to the title of this franchise agreement. 
 --- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-84, adopted Nov. 15, 2005, replaced Ord. No. 75-137, from which the original franchise derived, in its entirety. 
 --- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-7, adopted Feb. 2, 1988, repealed Ord. No. 87-104 in its entirety. Ordinance No. 87-104 had been amended by Ord. No. 87-123, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1987. 
 --- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-16, adopted Feb. 14, 1989, repealed Ord. No. 88-109 in its entirety. 
 --- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix B has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix C has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix G has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix D has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix E has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix F has not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 --- (17) --- 
Editor's note— The appendices referred to in section 11.2 above, with the exception of Appendix A, have not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 99-16, on file in the office of the city clerk. 

APPENDIX A - DEFINED TERMS 
For purposes of the agreement to which this Appendix A is appended, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
"Abandonment" means: (i) the cessation, by act or failure to act of the company of the provision of all, or substantially all, of the services then being provided over the system to subscribers or the franchising authority for 24 or more consecutive hours, except if due to an event beyond the control of the company; or (ii) the completion of any action described in section 8.1 or 8.2 of the agreement without the prior written consent of the franchising authority. 
"Affiliated person" means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the company; (ii) each person in which the company has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner holding an interest of 25 percent or more, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the company; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the company; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the franchising authority, the entity, if any, administering some or all of the access channels, any limited partner holding an interest of less than 25 percent of the company, or any creditor of the company solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, the company. 
"Agreement" means the agreement to which this Appendix A is appended, together with all appendices attached thereto and all amendments or modifications thereto. 
"Basic service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any equipment or installation used in connection with basic service. 
"Cable Act" means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. 00 521 et seq. 
"Communications system" means a "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
"Cable service" means: cable service as defined in the Cable Act. 
"Channel" means a "channel" or "cable channel" as defined in the Cable Act. 
"Company" means KNOLOGY of Columbus a corporation duly organized and validly existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, whose principal place of business is located at 1241 O. G. Skinner Drive, West Point, Georgia 31833. 
"Control" or "controlling interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments, or negative control, as the case may be, of the system, the franchise or the company. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor thereto. 
"Franchise area" means the territory embraced within the total area of Muscogee County, with the exception of Bibb City and Ft. Benning, as the same may be now or hereafter fixed and established by law, including any areas annexed by the franchising authority during the term of the franchise as determined by the franchising authority. 
"Franchising authority" means Columbus Consolidated Government, or the City of Columbus, Georgia, or, as appropriate in the case of specific provisions of this agreement, any board, bureau, authority, agency, commission, department of, or any other entity of or acting on behalf of, Columbus Consolidated Government or the City of Columbus, Georgia, or any officer, official, employee, or agent thereof, any designee of any of the foregoing, or any successor thereto. 
"Gross revenue" means all revenue, including advertising revenue, which is received, directly or indirectly, by the company, by any affiliated person, and any other person from or in connection with the distribution of any service on the system or the provision of any cable service related activity in connection with the system. 
"Pay service" means any cable service offered on a per channel or per program basis. 
"Person" means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, but shall not mean the franchising authority. 
"Responsible franchising official" means the body, organization or official to whom the applicable rights or obligations have been delegated by the franchising authority pursuant to applicable law. 
"Service" means any cable service only, including any basic service, including the provision of any equipment and any installation of equipment or facilities and monthly use thereof, whether originated by the company or any other person, which is offered to any person in conjunction with, or distributed over, the system, but does not include services other than cable service. 
"Signal" means any transmission of radio frequency energy or of optical information. 
"Streets" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any and all streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers, public grounds and public places or waters within and belonging to the franchising authority and any other property within the franchise area to the extent to which there exist public easements or public rights-of-way. 
"Subscriber" means any person lawfully receiving any service provided by the company by means of or in connection with the system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service. 
"Subscriber network" means that portion of the system over which services are provided primarily to residential subscribers. 
"System" means the communications system which is to be constructed, operated, maintained and upgraded, as necessary, by the company pursuant to this agreement, including, without limitation, all real property, all tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, subscriber lists, cables, amplifiers and all other electronic devices used in connection therewith and all rights, contracts and understandings with regard to any matter related thereto. 
LIGHTWAVE, L.L.C. 
ORDINANCE NO. 01-9 
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING LIGHTWAVE, L.L.C., A LIMITED LIABILITY CORPORATION FORMED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF ALABAMA AND DULY AUTHORIZED TO DO BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF GEORGIA, TO ENCROACH UPON THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY IN CERTAIN STREETS, EASEMENTS AND PUBLIC WAYS OF COLUMBUS CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT (CITY) FOR THE PURPOSE OF OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND FIBER OPTIC CABLE UPON CERTAIN TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR A PERIOD OF TEN YEARS. 
WHEREAS, Lightwave, LLC, a limited liability corporation formed under the laws of the State of Alabama and duly authorized to do business in the State of Georgia is desirous of installing, constructing, operating, maintaining, using, repairing and removing overhead and underground fiber optic cable upon the public right of way in certain streets, easements and public ways of the City for the purpose of connecting the point of presence located in the City to points of presence located outside the City and for the purpose of providing Telecommunications to Telecommunications Carriers; and 
WHEREAS, the City is willing to permit Lightwave, LLC to encroach upon the public right of way in certain streets, easements and public ways of the City as long as such use will not interfere with its own service requirements or the service requirements of others who are authorized to use the City's rights-of-way. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF COLUMBUS, GEORGIA HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
§ 1.  That Lightwave, L.L.C., referred to as "Licensee", subject to the conditions set forth in § 6, is hereby granted a revocable license (the "License") authorizing Licensee to encroach upon the public Streets in certain Streets and alleys within the corporate boundaries of Columbus Consolidated Government (hereafter "City"), for the purpose of installing, constructing, operating, maintaining, using, repairing and removing overhead and underground fiber optic cable ("Cable"), shown as dashed lines (overhead) and solid lines (underground) on a plan prepared by Licensee, dated December 1, 2000, (the "Route"), a copy of which drawing is attached to this Ordinance as Attachment "1". The Cable shall consist of a single cylindrical Cable not exceeding one inch in diameter, if above ground, or of a cylindrical conduit not exceeding four inches in diameter, if under ground, and such Cable or conduit may contain up to 96 fiber optic Cables. 
§ 2.  For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
"Affiliated Person" means each Person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) each Person having, directly or indirectly, a Controlling Interest in the Licensee; (2) each Person in which the Licensee has, directly or indirectly, a Controlling Interest; (3) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the Licensee; and (4) each Person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common Control with, the Licensee; provided that "Affiliated Person" shall in no event mean the City or any creditor of the Licensee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an Affiliated Person by reason of owning a Controlling Interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common Control with, the Licensee. 
"Cable Services" means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include Telecommunications Services or Private Telecommunications Services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Cable Services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
"City" means the Columbus Consolidated Government or, as appropriate in the case of specific provisions of this Ordinance, any board, bureau, authority, agency, commission, department of, or any other entity of or acting on behalf of, the City or any officer, official, employee, or agent thereof, any designee of any of the foregoing, or any successor thereto. 
"Control" or "Controlling Interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the Licensee or the Telecommunications System in the Streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of Control or a Controlling Interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any Person, or group of Persons acting in concert, of more than 25 percent of any Person (which Person or group of Persons is hereinafter referred to as "Controlling Person"). "Control" or "Controlling Interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one Person or group of Persons. 
"Licensee" means Lightwave, L.L.C., an Interexchange Carrier providing services to other Telecommunications Carriers. 
"Person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the City. 
"Responsible City Official" means the body, organization or official to whom the applicable rights or obligations have been delegated by the City pursuant to applicable law. 
"Streets" means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all Streets, alleys, avenues, highways, bridges, tunnels, and any other public Streets of the City within the corporate limits of the City, as the same now exists or may be hereafter constructed, developed, extended or altered, and any location thereon, and any portion thereof. 
"Telecommunications" means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include Cable Services. 
"Telecommunications Carrier" means "telecommunications carrier" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(44) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
"Telecommunications Service" means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include Cable Services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Telecommunications Service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
"Telecommunications System" means the Cable in or along the Route over which Telecommunications is provided, in accordance with the limitations under Section 6 of this Ordinance. 
§ 3.  The term of the License granted by this Ordinance commences February 6, 2001 ("Effective Date") and expires on February 6, 2011, unless the term (the "Term") is renewed as provided in Section 4, or is revoked as provided in Section 5, of this Ordinance. 
§ 4.  The Licensee may submit a written petition to renew the term of the License, not later than three months nor more than nine months prior to the end of the term set forth in Section 3. The City is not obligated to renew the Term, and the Licensee has no right to a renewal of the License. 
§ 5.  (a) The City, at its option and consistent with the terms and conditions of § 5(b) of this Ordinance, may terminate this License and revoke this Ordinance at any time, upon any breach by Licensee of the terms of this Ordinance. 
(b)  The Responsible City Official shall notify Licensee, in writing, of any alleged breach of this Ordinance by Licensee, which notice shall specify the alleged act(s) of breach with reasonable particularity. Within 30 days after receipt of such notice or such longer period of time as the Responsible City Official may specify in such notice, Licensee shall, either: (i) cure such alleged act(s) of breach, or (ii) present facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged act(s) of breach, or (iii) state that such alleged act(s) of breach will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
If the City Council reasonably determines that a material breach has occurred and that such breach is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by Licensee in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City, then the Responsible City Official shall prepare a written report which may recommend the action to be taken by the City Council. The Responsible City Official shall provide notice and a copy of such report to Licensee. In the event that the City Council determines that such a material breach has not occurred, or that such breach either has been or will be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City Council, or that such breach is excusable, such determination shall conclude the investigation. 
If the City Council determines that such a material breach has occurred, and that such breach has not been and will not be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City Council, and that such breach is not excusable, then the City Council may, but shall not be obligated to, immediately terminate the License and this Ordinance. 
In the event of any termination of the License, the Licensee, at the City's request and at the Licensee's own cost and expense, shall remove the Cable in the public Streets. The City shall have the right to establish reasonable terms and conditions for the removal of the Cable. 
§ 6.  This Ordinance authorizes the Licensee to encroach upon the public Streets as set forth in § 1 subject to the following conditions: (1) Licensee shall use only the Route, as set forth in Attachment "1" to this Ordinance, and (2) the Telecommunications System in the City shall be used solely for the following purposes: (a) to connect the point of presence located in the City at 1620 B, Fifth Avenue ("City POP") to points of presence located outside of the City ("Remote POPs"); and (b) to provide Telecommunications to Telecommunications Carriers for the purpose of transmitting Telecommunications from the Remote POPs to the City POP or transmitting Telecommunications from the City POP to the Remote POPs. Except to the extent expressly permitted by the immediately preceding sentence, the Telecommunications System shall not be used to originate or terminate Telecommunications Services from any location in the City and this License shall not be interpreted to authorize the Licensee to use the Streets to originate or terminate any Telecommunications Services from or to any Person or location in the City. Nothing in this License shall be interpreted to authorize any partner or affiliate of Licensee or any other Person to use the Streets to originate or terminate any Telecommunications Services from or to any Person or location in the City, or to otherwise use the Streets for purposes of providing Telecommunications. 
If the Licensee or the Telecommunications System fails to comply with the foregoing conditions in this Section 6, the City, in its sole discretion, may revoke and terminate the License as provided in Section 5 of this Ordinance; require the Licensee to obtain additional authorization from the City, including a Telecommunications franchise; and/or impose such other conditions or requirements permitted by applicable law or this Ordinance. If the Licensee or the Telecommunications System fails at any time to comply with each of the foregoing conditions in this Section 6, the Licensee shall promptly inform the City in writing. 
§ 7.  The Licensee shall give the City 30 days advance written notice requesting any use of additional Streets within the City (other than the Route) and shall abide by any licensing or franchising requirements as specified by City ordinances. 
§ 8.  The rights granted by this Ordinance to the Licensee are personal to the Licensee (as currently owned and Controlled). Such rights, the License granted by this Ordinance, and the Cable shall not be assigned or transferred, directly or indirectly, by a transfer of property, assets, Control or otherwise without the prior written consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
§ 9.  The Licensee shall also be subject to the following specific conditions: 
(a)  The Licensee, or any successor or assign, shall bear all costs incurred in connection with Licensee's installation, construction, maintenance, repair, operation and removal of its Cable. 
(b)  The Licensee, on the Licensee's own behalf and on behalf of any successor or assign, shall acknowledge and assume all responsibility for the permitted use of the public Streets and for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, operation and removal of the Cable, which shall be undertaken without risk or liability on the part of the City. 
(c)  On an annual basis, Licensee shall pay $6.94 per linear foot (4,400 feet as of the Effective Date) for each foot of its Cable in the public Streets as of January 1 of each year. The first payment under this Ordinance shall be prorated from the Effective Date to the end of the first calendar year of the Term and shall be due within 30 days from the Effective Date. Payments in advance for each subsequent year shall be remitted by January 30. The per linear foot fee shall be adjusted annually based upon the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index (CPI) (all Urban Cities base) during the calendar year prior to the year in which the change in the annual per linear foot fee rate is to be made. If any payment required by this Ordinance is not actually received by the City on or before the due date, the Licensee shall pay interest thereon from the due date to the date paid at a rate of one percent per month, compounded daily, for the period of delinquency. 
(d)  The Licensee shall furnish the City evidence of a public liability insurance contract, in a form reasonably acceptable to the City, in an amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit, naming the City and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees as additional insured. The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit the Licensee from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations, provided that the City, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by the Licensee. 
(e)  The Licensee shall also require any of its contractors or sub-contractors to furnish the City evidence of a public liability and property damage insurance contract in an amount of $1,000,000.00 combined coverage for bodily injuries and property damage resulting from the contractor's activities with respect to the installation, construction, operation, maintenance, use, repair and removal of the Cable on behalf of Licensee. Such insurance shall name the City and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees as additional insureds. 
(f)  The insurance policies required in this Section 9 shall be maintained by the Licensee its contractors or sub-contractors throughout the term of the License and such other period of time during which the Licensee operates or is engaged in the removal of its Cable from the City's Streets. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain an endorsement substantially in the form of the following: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled, nor the intention not to renew be stated, until 30 days after receipt by the City of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
Prior to any such cancellation, the Licensee, its contractors or sub-contractors shall obtain and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to the City. 
(g)  The legal liability of the Licensee to the City and any Person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this Section 9, including, without limitation, the Licensee's indemnification obligations set forth in this Ordinance, shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recoveries from or payments by the Licensee. 
(h)  To indemnify the City for any unreimbursed loss or damage to its Streets or any property of the City caused by the Licensee during construction, installation, operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance or removal of its Cable and to ensure the performance of the Licensee under this License, the Licensee shall arrange for a performance bond solely for the protection of the City, with a corporate surety or trust reasonably acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms and conditions contained in Attachment 2 of this License. A copy of the executed performance bond shall be delivered to the City by the Licensee on or before the Effective Date of this Ordinance. 
§ 10.  The Licensee shall be responsible for any liability, including, without limitation, any liability of the City and any Person, including, without limitation, any officer, employee, agent, attorney, consultant and independent contractor of the City, arising out of or in connection with the Licensee's acts or omissions in connection with the construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the Cable by the Licensee, or the provision by the Licensee of Telecommunications Services through the Cable. The Licensee shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore to as near as possible its prior condition, any property damaged in connection with the performance of any of the foregoing activities and shall pay any compensation and damages, finally adjudicated to be owed by Licensee pursuant to any claim against the Licensee as a result of any injury to or death of any Person occasioned by any act or failure to act of the Licensee, any Affiliated Person, or any officer, employee, agent or subcontractor thereof, in connection with Licensee's construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the Cable or the provision of Telecommunications Services through the Cable. Nothing in this Section 10 shall be interpreted to limit Licensee's indemnification obligations pursuant to this License. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit any recovery to which a Person may otherwise be entitled. 
§ 11.  The City, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not be responsible for any acts or omissions of the Licensee, any Affiliated Person or any other non-City Affiliated Person, arising out of or in connection with Licensee's construction, installation, operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance or removal of the Cable or the provision of Telecommunications Services through the Cable. The City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall have no liability to the Licensee, any Affiliated Person or any other Person for any special, incidental, consequential, punitive, or other damages as a result of the exercise of any right of the City pursuant to this Ordinance or applicable law. 
§ 12.  Except to the extent caused by acts of willful misconduct or gross negligence by the City or its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors, the Licensee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities, whether special, incidental, consequential or punitive, and all other damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with the award of this License, Licensee's construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of Cable or the provision of Telecommunications Services by Licensee through the Cable. The Licensee also shall cooperate with the City by providing such nonfinancial assistance as reasonably may be requested by the City in connection with any claim arising out of or in connection with the granting of the License. 
§ 13.  The Licensee shall be responsible for assuring that all overhead cables meet the minimum ground clearance as required by all applicable codes and regulations. 
§ 14.  The Licensee shall place its Cable underground where required by the City, County or State to do so and in any other locations where required by the City Engineer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event during the Term the Licensee is granted the right by the City to place its Cable above ground along a particular portion of a Route where the cables of Telecommunications Carriers and utilities are also above ground and the Licensee actually installs its Cable above ground along such portion, the City may not later require the Company to place such Cable underground unless the City also requires other Telecommunications Carriers or utilities with cable along such portion of the Route to place their cables under ground. 
§ 15.  Prior to construction, a final location plan for Licensee's Cable shall be submitted for approval by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be authorized to permit installation pursuant to such final location plan, or to require an alternate location for the Cable within the Route to avoid interference with other permitted uses of such Streets or to establish an appropriate width from curb for placement of the Cable for the use proposed. 
§ 16.  The Licensee shall provide as-built drawings detailing the location of its conduits and manholes installed pursuant to the approval and authorization granted pursuant to Section 15. 
§ 17.  Prior to the date this Ordinance is adopted, the Licensee shall (a) furnish the required insurance and bond forms and file a written statement, in a form reasonably satisfactory to the City Attorney, to the effect that the Licensee agrees to be bound by and to comply with all the terms and conditions set forth in this Ordinance and upon which this revocable License is granted, and (b) pay a $5,000.00 application fee and any permit fees required by the City. 
§ 18.  All work involved in the construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance and removal of the Cable shall be performed in a reasonably safe, thorough and reliable manner, using materials of good and durable quality. If it is reasonably determined by the City or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction, at any time, that the Cable is harmful to the health or safety of any Person, then the Licensee shall upon reasonable notice appropriate under the circumstances, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such harmful conditions. 
§ 19.  Neither the City nor its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors shall be responsible to the Licensee or any Affiliated Persons for any liability as a result of or in connection with the protection, breaking-through, movement, removal, alteration or relocation of any fiber optic Cable by or on behalf of the Licensee or the City in connection with any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any change in the grade or line of any public Streets, or the elimination, discontinuation and closing of any public Streets. The foregoing provision relieving the City from any liability pursuant to this Section shall not apply to acts of willful misconduct or to damages caused by violations by the City of Chapter 9 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended, relating to notification prior to excavation near underground utilities. Nothing herein shall be deemed an admission by the City of liability nor be interpreted to waive any protection against liability under any law. 
§ 20.  In connection with the construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the Cable, the Licensee shall not, except in an emergency, obstruct the sidewalks, streets, subways, railways, rivers or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of the City without the prior consent of the City. Cable of the Licensee in the public Streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the lawful use of the public Streets and adjoining property by other Persons. The Licensee shall, to the extent not prevented by an emergency, operate the Cable so as not to interfere with other lawful, permitted uses of the public Streets. The Licensee shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all reasonable and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placement and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, watchmen and suitable and sufficient lighting. 
§ 21.  The City may, at any time and in accordance with applicable law, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable sole discretion, cut or move the Cable as and to the extent necessary to contain or alleviate the harm threatened by the emergency at hand and/or to repair any damage to the Streets resulting therefrom, in which event the City shall not incur any liability to the Licensee or any Affiliated Person. The City shall use reasonable efforts under the circumstances if reasonably possible to consult with Licensee prior to any such cutting or movement of the Cable, and, if possible, Licensee shall be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such Cable shall be borne by the Licensee. 
§ 22.  The City has the right to oversee, regulate and inspect the construction, installation, repair, maintenance and removal of the Cable in the Streets. The City reserves the right to adopt or issue, in accordance with applicable law, such rules, regulations, orders or other directives, governing the Licensee, the Cable or the Licensee's Telecommunications System as it shall find necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to and in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance. 
§ 23.  Nothing in this Ordinance affects the right of the City to authorize any other Person to occupy and use the public Streets, including the streets and alleys set forth in the Attachment, to construct, install, operate, upgrade, repair, maintain and remove equipment used to provide any Telecommunications Services or Private Telecommunications Services, or to engage in any other activity in the public Streets. Nothing in this Ordinance affects the right of the City to occupy and use the public Streets to construct, install, operate, upgrade, repair, maintain and remove equipment used to provide any Telecommunications Services, or to engage in any other activity in the public Streets. 
§ 24.  Nothing in this Ordinance abrogates the right of the City to perform any public works or public improvements. If Licensee's Cable materially interferes with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of such public works or public improvements, the Licensee, at its own expense, shall, promptly after receipt of reasonable notice of such interference from the City, protect, alter or relocate such Cable, as reasonably directed by the City. If the Licensee refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate said Cable, the City may break through, remove, alter or relocate the Cable without any liability to the Licensee, and the Licensee shall pay to the City the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. The City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not have any liability to the Licensee for any damage as a result of, or in connection with, such public works or public improvements. Nothing herein shall be deemed an admission of liability by the City nor be interpreted to waive any protection against liability under any law. 
§ 25.  The Licensee shall obtain all necessary approvals, licenses, permits or other authorizations from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities to offer Telecommunications Services through the Cable, and shall, upon the City's request, submit evidence of such approvals to the City. The Licensee shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before constructing, installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, maintaining or removing the Cable. Any fees that the City charges to the Licensee to issue permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation or other payments that Licensee is required to pay to the City pursuant to this Ordinance. 
§ 26.  The Licensee shall comply with: (1) all applicable laws, rules, regulations, orders, writs, decrees and judgments (including, but not limited to, those of the FCC and any other federal, state agency or authority of competent jurisdiction); and (2) all local laws and all rules, regulations, orders, or other directives of the City issued pursuant to this Ordinance. The Licensee shall have the sole responsibility for obtaining all federal and state permits, licenses and other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, install, operate, repair, maintain and remove the Cable and provide Telecommunications Services therewith. 
§ 27.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this Ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
§ 28.  Notices. All notices, statements, demands, requests, consents, approvals, authorizations, offers, agreements, appointments, designations, or other direction or communication hereunder by any party to another shall be in writing and shall be sufficiently given and served upon the other party, immediately if delivered personally or by telex or telecopy (provided with respect to telex and telecopy that such transmissions are received on a business day during normal business hours), the second business day after dispatch if sent by express mail, and the fifth business day after dispatch if sent by first class mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and addressed as follows: 
CITY: 
Office of the City Manager  Columbus Consolidated Government  P. O. Box 1340  Columbus, Georgia 31902-1340 
WITH A COPY TO: 
Columbus Consolidated Government  Finance Department  Office of the Finance Director  PO Box 1340  Columbus, Georgia 31902-1340 
GRANTEE: 
Lightwave L.L.C.  310 Longleaf Circle  Monroeville, Alabama 36461  Attn: Charles R. Wasden  Facsimile: 334-575-9070 
WITH A COPY TO: 
Gerry, Friend & Sapronov, L.L.P.  Attn: Norman D. Gerry  Three Ravinia Drive, Suite 1450  Atlanta, Georgia 30346-2131 
ATTACHMENT 2 
PERFORMANCE BOND 
§ 1.  Amount. The initial Performance Bond shall be in the face amount of not less than $40,000.00. Such bond amount shall remain in effect throughout the Term of this License and for 90 days thereafter. 
§ 2.  Withdrawals from the Performance Bond. The City may make withdrawals from the Performance Bond upon the occurrence of any final determination by the City's governing body pursuant to Section 5 hereof that a breach by Licensee has occurred and that such breach has not and will not be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City's governing body and that such breach is not excusable. Withdrawals from the Performance Bond shall not be deemed a cure of any default(s) that led to the withdrawal. Prior to making any withdrawals from the Performance Bond, the City will give Licensee at least seven business days advance written notice of its intent to make a withdrawal from the Performance Bond. The City's right to make withdrawals shall not be subject to Licensee's approval. The City may not seek recourse against the Performance Bond for any costs or damages for which the City has previously been compensated through a withdrawal from the Performance Bond or otherwise by Licensee if the result of the withdrawal is to compensate the City twice. 
§ 3.  Notice of Withdrawals. The City shall notify Licensee in writing of the date and amount of any withdrawal. The withdrawal of amounts from the Performance Bond shall constitute a credit against the amount of the applicable liability of Licensee to the City, but only to the extent of said withdrawal. 
§ 4.  Replenishment. Within 30 days after receipt of notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Performance Bond, Licensee shall restore the Performance Bond to the applicable amount specified in Section 1 of this Attachment 2. Provided however, if a court finally determines that said withdrawal by the City was improper, the City shall refund the improperly withdrawn amount to the Licensee in the event Licensee has replenished such amount to the Performance Bond. If the Licensee has not replenished such amount, the City shall refund the improperly drawn amount to company issuing the Performance Bond. 
§ 5.  Form. The Performance Bond shall be in a form and content reasonably approved by the City and shall be furnished to the City on or before the Effective Date of this License. The Performance Bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the surety until at least 60 days prior written notice to the City of surety's intention to cancel or not renew this bond." 
§ 6.  Not a Limit on Liability. The obligation to perform and the liability of the License pursuant to this License shall not be limited by the City's acceptance of the Performance Bond required by this Attachment 2. 
Chapter 13 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— As to the state department of public welfare, see Ga. Code, Title 99; as to the state board of health, see Title 88. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - SMOKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, enacted provisions designated as Art. I, Div. 2. In order to facilitate indexing, §§ 13-01, 13-02 have been designated as Art. I, Div. 1, §§ 13-01, 13-02. 

Sec. 13-01. - Smoking in buildings owned by consolidated government. 
Effective 60 days from the date of adoption of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco or any similar substance in any fashion or form in any building owned by the consolidated government, except in areas designated as a "smoking area" by the city manager. Appropriate "no smoking" signs shall be erected and appropriate signs designating any "smoking area" shall be erected in such buildings. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 7-2-91) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-56, adopted July 2, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence its inclusion as § 13-01 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Smoking in municipal auditorium, § 4-25.3; smoking on buses, § 14-62.1. 
Sec. 13-02. - Smoking at city park or recreational facility. 
In addition to no-smoking areas designated by ordinance or by the city manager, the smoking of tobacco in any form during regularly scheduled games is prohibited on playing fields, in dugouts, and within 25 feet of bleachers or permanently affixed spectator seats located at any city park or recreational facility. The city manager shall be authorized to designate smoking areas in city parks or recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, 1-22-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2002, enacted a provision intended for use as § 13-01.1; this section has been renumbered as § 13-02 at the discretion of the editor, and set out above. 
Secs. 13-03—13-05. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, adopted May 11, 2010, enacted provisions intended for codification in Ch. 13. In order to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been designated as Art. I, Div. 2, § 13-06. 

Sec. 13-06. - Environmental health fees. 
The following city health department environmental health fees are hereby adopted. 

 
(Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 5-11-10) 
Secs. 13-07—13-09. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLISM AND INTOXICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The title of Art. I was renumbered as Art. II by the editor to allow for inclusion of a new Art. I. 

Sec. 13-1. - Statement of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of Columbus, Georgia, that persons may not be subjected to criminal prosecution solely because of their consumption of alcoholic beverages, but rather should be afforded an opportunity for treatment in order that they may lead normal lives as productive members of society. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 2, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-2. - Definitions. 
The terms used herein shall have the meanings defined in the Uniform Alcoholism and Intoxication Treatment Act of 1974 (Act No. 882, Ga. Laws 1974, p. 200). 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 2, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-3. - Juveniles excepted from article provisions. 
Any person under the age of 17 years and subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court shall not be subject to this article. Such person may be referred by order of juvenile court to an approved treatment facility. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 2, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-4. - Protective custody—Options of detaining officer. 
A person who appears to be incapacitated by alcohol shall be taken into protective custody by the police or other law enforcement officer and forthwith brought to an approved treatment facility for emergency treatment. If no approved treatment facility is available, such person shall be taken to an emergency medical service facility customarily used for incapacitated persons. A person incapacitated by alcohol who does not require emergency treatment may be taken home or, if the person will not go home, may be taken into protective custody and held in the jail until such person is no longer incapacitated by alcohol, but for no longer than a period of 12 hours. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 2, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-5. - Same—Duty of officer to protect subject; right to protect self. 
The policeman or other law enforcement officer, in taking such person into protective custody, shall make reasonable effort to protect such person; provided, however, that the detaining officer may take reasonable steps to protect himself. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-6. - Same—Not to constitute arrest. 
The taking into protective custody of a person incapacitated by alcohol under section 13-4 shall not constitute an arrest, nor shall any record be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime; provided, however, that such person may be searched for weapons or other items which may be used to cause harm to the detainee, police officer, or other person. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-7. - Same—Right to telephone call. 
Persons taken into protective custody shall be allowed to make one telephone call at such person's own expense. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-8. - Actions of law enforcement officer deemed course of official duty. 
Any policeman or law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this article is hereby declared to be acting in the course of official duty. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-9. - Scope of article provisions; intoxication not a defense against other charges. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to excuse or justify any other crime simply because the perpetrator is intoxicated. Nothing in this article shall repeal, annul or otherwise affect any law, ordinance, resolution or rule against drunken driving, driving under the influence of alcohol, or other similar offense involving the operation of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, machinery or other equipment, or regarding the sale, purchase, dispensing, possessing or use of alcoholic beverages at stated times and places or by a particular class of persons, or any other criminal act. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Sec. 13-10. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 81-31, § 1, 5-5-81) 
Secs. 13-11—13-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— For state law provisions relevant to abatement of nuisance by cities, see Ga. Code, §§ 72-401, 72-402, 72-105. 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Jaques, 30 Ga. 506, for holding that the erection in the streets of a market by the commissioners of commons without authority constituted a nuisance that would be ordered removed. 

Sec. 13-98. - Definition. 
The existence of any of the things mentioned in this article and the existence of any matter or thing in the corporate limits of this city, which shall or does tend to the immediate annoyance of the citizens in general, or which may be manifestly injurious to the public health or safety, or tend to corrupt the manners and morals of the people, or any considerable portion thereof, shall be and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(Code 1914, § 731) 
Sec. 13-99. - Hides, curing. 
No person shall cure hides, either by means of salt or otherwise, at any place within the corporate limits of the city, where the same may be offensive to any of the citizens. 
(Code 1914, § 728) 
Secs. 13-100—13-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 13-100—13-105 have been deleted herefrom as being superseded by Ord. No. 90-28, adopted April 20, 1990, the substantive provisions of which are included herein as § 14-201 et seq. The deleted provisions also pertained to noise and derived from §§ 1—6 of an ordinance of Oct. 21, 1935, as amended by § 1 of Ord. No. 80-79, adopted July 15, 1980. 
Sec. 13-106. - Privies, declared a nuisance. 
The construction, use or maintenance of any privy, privy vault, water closet or cesspool contrary to the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health, and may be abated in the methods provided by the law of Georgia or the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-33, § 16) 
Sec. 13-107. - Waste, human; illegal disposal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city or its police district to throw out, deposit or bury any human excreta, solid or liquid, or to dispose of such substances in any manner other than in a properly sewered water closet or approved sanitary privy. 
(Ord. of 12-5-33, § 3) 
Sec. 13-108. - Violations; right of entry by health officials, notice to conform. 
The health officer, or his deputies and assistants, shall have the right to enter upon the premises drained by any house drain, or connected with any public sewer, or served by any sanitary privies, at all reasonable hours, to ascertain whether the provisions of this article or any other ordinance have been complied with; and in case it should be ascertained that the provisions of this article or other ordinances are not being complied with, he shall notify the owner of such premises, the owner's agents or tenants, to cause the drain, sewer pipe, privy or attachments to be so altered, repaired, or reconstructed as to make them conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-33, § 6) 
Sec. 13-109. - Water standing—Drainage required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, yard, or premise in the city, or for any agent or representative of any such owner or occupant, to permit rain, drainage or stagnant water to stand or remain upon such lot, yard, or premises or in any cellar in a manner that may constitute a health hazard as determined by the commissioner of health. In a natural drainage situation from one lot to another, it shall be unlawful for the owner of the lower lot to restrict the flow of water willfully or by neglect or otherwise to cause water to stagnate on the upper lot or lots. 
(Ord. No. 72-176, § 1, 9-12-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-176, §§ 1—4, amended this Code by deleting former §§ 13-109 and 13-111, derived from Code 1914, §§ 413 and 416, and enacting in lieu thereof new §§ 13-109 and 13-111, and by adding §§ 13-110.1 and 13-110.2. 
Sec. 13-110. - Same—Same—Performance of work. 
After the expiration of the time stated in the aforesaid notice provided in the preceding section, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works, with the assistance of the city engineer to proceed to have the lot, yard, or premises properly drained in such manner as they deem advisable. 
(Code 1914, § 415) 
Editor's note— Provisions relative to notice are now set forth in §§ 13-110.1 and 13-111. 
Sec. 13-110.1. - Same—Same—Notice to drain. 
When any stagnant water is being maintained on any lot or premise in violation of the preceding section, it shall be the duty of the health officer, or any responsible servant of the city to notify the party or parties of such violation. The written notice shall set forth how, when and in what manner such corrective measures are to be performed to comply with the preceding section, and eliminate the stagnant water or otherwise provide adequate control of any public health hazards or nuisances caused by stagnated water. 
(Ord. No. 72-176, § 2, 9-12-72) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 13-109. 
Sec. 13-110.2. - Same—Same—Restricting natural flow of storm drainage prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation shall restrict in any manner the natural flow of storm drainage in any ditch, culvert, pipe, or other conveyor of storm water. 
(Ord. No. 72-176, § 3, 9-12-72) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 13-109. 
Sec. 13-111. - Same—Same—Notice thereof to nonresidents, assessment of costs, execution and sale. 
Where the owner or occupant of any land violating the provisions hereof relating to drainage or stagnant water and the owner or occupant cannot be served with notice or summons, so as to subject him to punishment by the recorder, the health officer shall notify such owner, at the address shown in the tax commissioner's records, with a copy to the occupant. Both notices shall be sent by certified mail and direct how and in what manner such corrective measures are to be performed to correct the drainage and stagnant water nuisance. If within ten days from the date of mailing of the notice, the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice and this article, the director of public works shall have the drainage work performed, charging the amount of cost thereof to such owner, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the lot, as of the date of such work, and if such amount be not paid within 30 days after the doing of the work, the Finance Director of the Columbus Consolidated Government shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, whereupon such real estate should be levied on, advertised and sold under such execution, as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due the consolidated government, with same procedure including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of the consolidated government to purchase at the sale. 
(Ord. No. 72-176, § 4, 9-12-72; Ord. No. 17-52, § 1, 8-29-17) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 13-109. 
Sec. 13-112. - Prevention and control of mosquitos and rodents. 
(A)  Definitions. 
Any collection of water as used in this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cess pools and/or septic tanks, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubes, appliances, automobiles and parts, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, receptacles of any kind, or other container or devices which may hold water. 
"Larvae" shall mean the immature stages of mosquitoes living in water between the egg stage and the pupa stage. 
"Pupae" shall mean the immature stages of mosquitoes living in water and is the last stage before the adult form. 
"Larvicide" shall mean the practice of killing mosquito larvae with stomach poisons, contact poisons or petroleum oils. 
"Rodent infestation" shall mean the observation of live rats, droppings, runways, tracks, burrows, nests and gnawings, singly or in combination. 
"Rodenticides" shall mean the practice of killing rodents with poisons, most of which are mixed with baits. 
"Rodent" shall mean for the purpose of this section those members of the rodent family referred to as rats and mice. 
(B)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit, within the limits of Columbus, Georgia any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit, within the limits of Columbus, Georgia any rodent infestation. 
(C)  Prevention and control. 
(1)  The methods used, or treatment directed toward the prevention of breeding mosquitoes in collections of water and for the prevention and treatment of rodents shall be of a type approved by the Columbus Department of Public Health. Approved methods of mosquito and rodent prevention and control may consist of one or more of the following procedures: 
(a)  Mosquito control. 
(1)  Remove from premises, vacant property, and areas all cans, boxes, broken or empty bottles, vehicle tires and all similar articles likely to hold water; 
(2)  Eliminate collections of water by filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer or his representatives; 
(3)  Larvicide collections of water by spraying with oil or otherwise treating the collected water with an effective chemical, and in a manner approved by the health department; 
(4)  Free collections of water of all vegetative growth, floating debris, and other obstructions prior and in addition to other control measures as may be required to prevent mosquito breeding; 
(5)  Stock collections of water with mosquito-destroying fish; 
(6)  Empty collections of water every seven days; Screen collections of water with corrosion resistant netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way; or with other material which will effectually prevent the ingress, egress of mosquitos; 
(7)  Such other methods as may be prescribed by the health department for special situations not covered above. 
(b)  Rodent control. 
(1)  Sanitate premises by maintaining good garbage storage in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, Article VII, Solid Waste Storage, Collection and Disposal; 
(2)  Eliminate the accumulation of rubbish, leaves and grass clippings which provide rodent harborage; store firewood, lumber or other materials 12 to 18 inches off the floor or ground; 
(3)  Store all foodstuffs both for human consumption and for animal consumption in rodent-proof containers 12 to 18 inches off the floor; 
(4)  Rodent-proof all openings into buildings to prevent entry of rodents; 
(5)  Treat rodent infestations with an effective rodenticide following manufacturers directions, and in a manner approved by the health department; 
(6)  Use traps if poisons fail or are too risky; 
(7)  Such other methods as may be prescribed by the health department for special situations not covered above. 
(D)  Evidence and violation. 
(1)  The presence of mosquito larvae or pupae in collections of water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within five days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent, or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(2)  The presence of live rats or mice, droppings, runways, tracks, burrows, nests and gnawings, singly or in combination shall be evidence that a rodent infestation does exist, and failure to prevent such rodent infestation within five days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent, or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(E)  Corrective action nonresidents. Should the property owner responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes or permits a rodent-infestation to exist, be a nonresident of Columbus, Georgia with no agent or representative in Columbus, Georgia, and said owner cannot be served with notice or summons, so as to subject him to recorder's court the health officer, his authorized agent, or representative shall notify such owner by mail, directing that the above stated conditions exists on his premises and that such conditions be corrected so as to comply herewith. If within ten days from the date of mailing the notice the owner fails to comply with the notice and this article, the health officer, his authorized agent, or representative shall correct and/or treat the mosquito breeding or rodent infestation, charging the total amount of the cost thereof to the owner, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the lot, as of the date of said work and if such amount is not paid within 30 days after completion of the work, the director of the department of finance shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, whereupon such real estate shall be levied on, advertised and sold under such execution, as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due Columbus, Georgia with same procedure, including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of Columbus, Georgia to purchase at the sale. No property shall be sold under the provisions of this section unless said sale is approved by resolution of the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(F)  Inspection of premises. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction, to ascertain whether the provisions of this section or any other ordinance have been complied with; and in case it should be ascertained that the provisions of this section or other ordinances are not being complied with, he shall notify the owner of such premises, the owner's agent or tenants to correct the violations and to make them conform with the requirements of this section or other ordinances. 
(G)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Columbus Department of Public Health to see that provisions of this section are enforced and such department shall endeavor to secure all proper evidence and issue summons to defendants and witnesses in order that the recorder may be furnished with all essential and available facts upon the trial of offenses under this section. 
(H)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(I)  Partial invalidity clause. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section or the application of same to any particular set of persons or circumstances, should, for any reason, be held invalid, such invalidity all in no way affect the remaining portions of the section, and to such end the various provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 72-177, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-177, §§ 1 and 2, amended this Code by repealing former § 13-112 relative to the accumulation of water in open vessels in such a manner as to contribute to mosquito breeding, and enacted in lieu thereof a new § 13-112 as herein set out. Former § 13-112 was derived from Code 1914, § 734. 
Sec. 13-113. - Weeds—Defined; prohibition. 
(a)  Weeds shall be defined as common grasses and other non woody plants that tend to overgrow or choke out more desirable plants excluding all ornamental grasses and flowers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any occupied lot of land in the city, or the owner of any unoccupied lot in the city, or for any agent or representative of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any growth of weeds or grass to a height of over 18 inches. The provisions hereof shall not be applicable to that part of any lot of land located more than 100 feet from any building. 
(Ord. of 10-5-36, § 1; Ord. No. 86-12, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 11-45, § 1, 8-30-11) 
Sec. 13-114. - Same—Notice of violation; penalty for failure to remove. 
When any weeds or grass are being maintained on any lot in violation of the preceding section, it shall be the duty of the public services director, or one of his assistants, to notify in writing the occupant of such lot, if it be occupied, or the owner thereof, if it be unoccupied, or their agents or representatives, allowing ten days to correct the violation. No further written notice or warning period to correct the violation shall be required during a period of 36 months after the initial written notice. If the violator or his representative or agent fails to cut and remove the grass or weeds so as to comply with the requirements of the preceding section, such party shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-5-36, § 2; Ord. No. 86-12, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 91-74, § 1, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 06-80, § 1, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 13-115. - Same—Notice to property occupants and owners; assessment of costs; execution and sale. 
Where the owner or occupant of land violates the provisions hereof relating to removal of weeds and the owner or occupant, and such owner or occupant or his agent or representative cannot be served with notice or summons so as to subject him to punishment by the recorder, the director of inspections and code enforcement or one of his assistants shall notify such owner by certified mail, directing the weeds or grass on his lot be cut and removed, so as to comply with section 13-113 of this Code. The certified mail notice shall allow ten days from the date of receipt or a second attempt to deliver such notice to correct the violation. After this notice and during a period of 36 months, no further written notice or warning period shall be required. If the owner fails to comply with the provisions herein, the director of inspections and code enforcement shall have the weeds and grass cut and removed, assessing a fee plus a service charge (as recommended annually by the directors of public works and finance and approved by the city manager) for the work and charging the amount to the owner, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the lot, as of the date of such work, and if such amount be not paid within 30 days after the doing of the work, the finance director of the consolidated government shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, whereupon such real estate shall be levied on, advertised and sold under such execution, as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due the city, with same procedure, including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of the consolidated government to purchase at the sale. 
(Ord. of 10-5-36, § 3; Ord. No. 91-74, § 2, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 03-64, § 1, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 06-80, § 2, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 17-52, § 2, 8-29-17) 
Sec. 13-115.1. - Growing of kudzu vine regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person growing kudzu vine within the city limits of the City of Columbus to allow such kudzu vine to spread upon the property of an adjoining property owner. 
(Ord. No. 70-198, § 1, 8-3-70) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 70-198 did not specifically amend this Code hence codification as § 13-115.1 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 13-116. - Wells, cisterns, dangerous holes; open; abatement, notice, costs assessed as taxes. 
It shall be unlawful on any lot or parcel of land, for the owner to allow to exist any abandoned or open well, cistern, dangerous hole or excavation, and any person owning a lot or parcel of land in the city on which such a nuisance exists, who shall refuse to abate the same on notice from the health department to do so after five days' notice, shall be guilty of a violation of this code. 
In case the owner of any lot or parcel of land in the city on which there exists an open well, cistern, dangerous hole or excavation, be a nonresident of the city, after public notice through the daily press or otherwise, specifying the nuisance to be abated, if such nuisance is not abated within one week after the notice, then to abate such nuisance and the cost or expenses thereof, such owner shall be assessed by the city as a tax against the property on which such nuisance exists and the tax so assessed shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum until paid, and shall be carried on the regular tax rolls of the city and be collected in the manner provided for in the collection of general taxes. 
(Code 1914, § 412) 
Note— City of Columbus vs. Pearson, 83 Ga. 288, 9 SE 1102, held that city was not liable in damages to person falling into open sewer at night where such opening was lighted. 
Sec. 13-117. - Complaint, hearing, order to abate. 
(a)  Any person complaining of any nuisance shall complain to the recorder in writing, setting forth particularly the location and nature of the same, and how he may be affected thereby, whereupon it shall be the duty of the recorder to cause the parties creating or permitting such nuisance to be summoned to appear before the recorder's court as in other cases. After hearing the testimony in the case, the recorder may, in his discretion, order the party creating or permitting such nuisance to abate the nuisance in such manner and within such time as the recorder may prescribe. 
(b)  When a nuisance as defined in article III of this chapter cannot be abated in a timely manner by other means, enforcement officials shall complain to the recorder in writing setting forth particularly the location and nature of the same, how it creates an unsafe condition, a public health hazard or a general nuisance to the persons residing in the vicinity, and detailing the actions taken that have failed to abate the nuisance. After hearing the testimony in the case, the recorder may, in his or her discretion, order the nuisance to be abated by the appropriate officials. The director of inspections and code enforcement shall have the nuisance abated, assessing a fee plus a service charge (as recommended annually by the directors of public works and finance and approved by the city manager) for the work and charging the amount to the owner or occupant of the property, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, as of the date of such work, and if such amount is not paid within 30 days after the completion of the work, the finance director of the consolidated government shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, whereupon such real estate shall be levied on, advertised and sold under such execution, as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due the city, with same procedure, including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of the consolidated government to purchase at the sale. 
(Code 1914, § 732; Ord. No. 17-52, § 3, 8-29-17) 
Sec. 13-118. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the recorder's court, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Forfeiture of a cash bond in lieu of appearance in recorder's court by the person cited for a violation of this article shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution for the same violation. 
(Ord. of 12-5-33, § 17; Ord. No. 17-52, § 4, 8-29-17) 
Sec. 13-119. - Same—Use and enforcement. 
The city may employ and enforce any one or more of the remedies and penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. of 12-5-33, § 18) 
ARTICLE IV. - BIOMEDICAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 13-120. - Definitions. 
Biomedical waste shall mean and include the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy and laboratory procedures. 
(2)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings and other bulk body fluids. 
(3)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories; cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories; wastes from the production of biologicals; discarded live and attenuated vaccines; and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(4)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)  Sharps, which means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, I.V. tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling, and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty I.V. tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The above waste must first be classified as empty, which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-121. - Generation of biomedical waste. 
(a)  The requirements of this article shall apply to all persons or facilities who generate biomedical waste. For purposes of this article, a facility is defined as one or more persons generating biomedical waste who share common waste management services including, but not limited to, bulk storage containers. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all facilities generating regulated quantities of biomedical waste, including, but not limited to, clinics, dental offices, funeral homes, health maintenance organizations (HMOs), hospitals, laboratories, medical buildings, physicians offices, veterinary offices, research and manufacturing facilities, nursing homes, and blood banks. 
(c)  In no case shall a person be a generator of biomedical waste if those wastes are generated from single-family residential premises or a single-family dwelling unit and disposed of as residential solid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-122. - Storage and containment. 
(a)  Containment of biomedical waste shall be in a manner and location which affords protection from animals, rain and wind, does not provide a breeding place or a food source for insects and rodents, and minimizes exposure to the public. 
(b)  Biomedical waste shall be segregated by separate containment from other waste at the point of origin. 
(1)  Biomedical waste, except for sharps, shall be placed in containers which are impervious to moisture and have a strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing, or bursting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling or transport. 
(2)  Sharps shall be contained for storage, transportation, treatment and subsequent disposal in leakproof, rigid, puncture resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded to preclude loss of contents. 
(c)  Rigid containers of discarded sharps and all other disposable containers used for containment of biomedical waste shall be red or orange in color or clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or clearly marked with the word "biohazard." 
(d)  Biomedical waste contained in disposable containers as prescribed above, shall be placed for storage, handling or transport in disposable or reusable pails, cartons, boxes, drums, dumpsters or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tightfitting cover and be kept clean and in good repair. The containers may be of any color and shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the word "biohazard" on the sides so as to be readily visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
(1)  Reusable containers used for shipment of biomedical waste to a treatment facility or permitted sanitary landfill shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated each time they are emptied unless the surfaces of the containers have been protected from contamination by disposable liners, bags or other devices removed with the waste. 
(2)  Reusable pails, drums, dumpsters or bins used for containment of biomedical waste shall not be used for other purposes except after being decontaminated by procedures as described in this paragraph and after the universal biohazard symbol and word "biohazard" are removed. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-123. - Transfer of biomedical waste to off-site treatment or disposal facilities. 
(a)  Any generator of biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector who is operating under authority of the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4. 15, Biomedical Waste. 
(b)  Biomedical waste shall not be transported in the same vehicle with other solid waste unless the biomedical waste is contained in a separate, fully enclosed leakproof container within the vehicle compartment or unless all of the waste is to be treated as biomedical waste in accordance with the requirements of this regulation. 
(c)  Biomedical waste shall be delivered for storage, including intermediate transfer, and treatment only to a facility or location for which there is a valid and appropriate operating permit as set forth in these rules. 
(d)  Surfaces of transport vehicles that have contacted spilled or leaked biomedical waste shall be decontaminated. 
(e)  Packaged biomedical waste may not be compacted or shredded prior to delivery to the treatment or disposal facility unless such compaction or shredding is in conjunction with chemical or other treatment which renders the waste noninfectious. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-124. - Treatment of biomedical waste. 
(a)  If treated in accordance with the following procedures, the waste shall no longer be considered biomedical waste and may be combined and handled with regular solid waste. Biomedical waste shall be treated by one of the following methods prior to disposal at a permitted solid waste disposal facility. 
(1)  Incineration in an incinerator which provides complete combustion of waste to render it nonpathogenic. 
a.  Biomedical waste incinerators shall be capable of maintaining a minimum temperature in the primary chamber sufficient to destroy infectious agents and produce a residue essentially free of odors and unstable organic matter. If chemotherapy wastes are incinerated, the incinerator must be capable of maintaining a minimum of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit in the secondary combustion chamber and minimum residence time of two seconds. 
b.  Atmospheric emissions shall be controlled so as not to exceed air quality standards of the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
(2)  Decontamination by heating with steam under pressure (autoclave) so as to render the biomedical waste noninfectious. 
a.  Recording of the thermometer during each complete cycle shall be used to ensure the attainment of a temperature of 121 degrees Centigrade (250 degrees Fahrenheit) for one-half hour or longer in order to achieve decontamination of the entire load. 
b.  Monitoring of the steam sterilization process shall be required in order to confirm the attainment of decontamination. 
c.  Monitoring may be through the use of biological indicators or other methods as approved by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
d.  Autoclave treatment of biomedical waste will be identified with the home address and phone number of the treatment facility and a statement affixed to the container certifying the contents have been decontaminated by heating with steam under pressure. 
(3)  Other methods as may be approved by the DNR. 
(b)  Biomedical wastes consisting of recognizable human anatomical remains shall not be disposed of by sanitary landfilling. 
(c)  Chemotherapy waste, as defined in 13-120(f), shall be treated at a permitted incineration facility or other facility approved by the DNR. Steam decontamination may not be used for treatment of chemotherapy waste. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-125. - Disposal of biomedical waste. 
(a)  Biomedical wastes treated in accordance with the provisions in section 13-124 shall be properly disposed of at a facility permitted under the authority of this article unless otherwise approved by the EPD. 
(b)  The disposal of untreated biomedical waste at a permitted sanitary landfill shall be prohibited after July 1, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Sec. 13-126. - Enforcement. 
The health department, the police department, and the special enforcement division of the public services department are authorized and directed to cooperate in the enforcement of provisions of this article appropriately requiring an investigation by their respective departments. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, 4-9-91) 
Secs. 13-127—13-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 13-131. - Applicability. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1, scrap tire handling shall be regulated from the point of generation through disposal. The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons presently engaged in or proposing to be engaged in the retail sale of new replacement tires and/or handling of scrap tires in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 13-132. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article; 
EPD means Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value or, in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration of pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor, or disposer approved by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of "used", "retreadable casings", and "scrap tires". 
Retreadable casing means a tire which has the quality and soundness of the tire structure to accept a retread or repair and provide additional service and is destined for retreading. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. Retail tire dealers may also be, but are not limited to, manufacturers, wholesalers, and others who sell new replacement tires to the ultimate consumer. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in this Section for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings, and other elements). Processing includes, but is not limited to, shredding, baling, recycling, or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive scrap tires from generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: 
(1)  An individual consumer; 
(2)  A leasing company purchasing tires from retailers for their vehicle fleet; 
(3)  A private company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or 
(4)  A governmental agency purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32" of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD and the special enforcement division that a market exists, and that the used tires are, in fact, being marketed. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 13-133. - Scrap tire generators. 
(a)  Any person who generates scrap tires shall have a Scrap Tire Generator Identification Number (ID#) issued by the EPD. The ID# shall be used on scrap tire shipment manifests. Separate ID numbers shall be required for generators having multiple generation locations. 
(b)  Generators shall initiate a 3-part manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an end user or to a scrap tire processing or disposal facility approved by the EPD. The manifest shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and ID# of the generator; 
(2)  Number of total tons (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
(3)  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
(4)  Date of transport; and 
(5)  Destination of scrap tires. 
(c)  If a generator chooses to use tons of tires rather than actual numbers of tires on the manifest for passenger and truck tires, the following conversion factor must be used: 
Passenger Tires: 2000 lb. (one ton) = 100 tires, @ 20 lb/tire; 
Truck Tires: 2000 lb. (one ton) = 20 tires, @ 100 lb/tire. 
(d)  Unless otherwise approved in writing by the EPD, generators shall assure that any person collecting and transporting their scrap tires hold a valid Scrap Tire Carrier Permit issued by the EPD; provided, however, that a person who generates less than 100 tires per month and who transports only their own scrap tires to approved end users, processors, recyclers, or disposers are not required to have a Scrap Tire Carrier Permit, but must comply with all other provisions required of generators and scrap tire carriers. 
(e)  Generators shall maintain receipts (copies of the completed manifest) for a period of three years. 
(f)  A generator shall report to the special enforcement division any carrier who fails to return a properly completed manifest to the generator within 30 days of scrap tires pickup as provided for in section 13-134 (d) of this article. Such report shall be filed within 30 days of failure of the carrier to comply. 
(g)  Generators may choose to determine whether a tire because of wear, damage, or defect, is not suitable for classification as a "used tire", or "retreadable casing" as defined in this article. However, if a generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are "used", "retreadable casings", or "scrap tires", then all tires transported shall be considered scrap tires and must be thusly indicated on the shipment manifest. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 13-134. - Scrap tire carriers. 
(a)  Unless otherwise exempted, any person collecting or transporting scrap tires shall have a scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD. 
(b)  A separate permit shall be required for each scrap tire Carrier business location. 
(c)  A carrier shall transport scrap tires, properly manifested, only to an end user, recycler, processor, sorter, or disposer approved or permitted by the EPD. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator, no later than 30 days from the date on which the carrier took possession of the scrap tires, which shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(e)  The following persons shall not be required to have a scrap tire carrier permit: 
(1)  Generators who transport scrap tires only between their own branch office locations; 
(2)  Persons carrying only used tires or retreadable casings; 
(3)  A tire retailer or tire retreader transporting tires to or from a customer's place of operation or between branch offices of the tire retailer or tire retreader; 
(4)  A municipal solid waste collector holding a valid solid waste collection permit under authority of EPD Rule 391-3-4-.19 whose primary business is the collection of municipal solid waste; 
(5)  A private individual transporting the individual's own scrap tires to a processor, permitted disposal facility, or other facility approved by the EPD; 
(6)  A company transporting the company's own tires to a processor for proper disposal, which company is not in the tire handling business; for example, a soft drink bottler who transports scrap tires generated by the bottler's own vehicle maintenance shop, or a company in the tire handling business who transports only their own scrap tires and which company generates less than 100 scrap tires per month. 
a.  For the purpose of this paragraph, "tire handling business" means persons whose income is at least partially derived from the sale, processing, transporting, or disposal of tires. 
b.  Persons who generate less than 100 scrap tires per month and are exempt from having a carrier permit under this section are still required to comply with other applicable provisions of this article. 
(7)  Others persons, as approved by the EPD, on a one time or temporary basis, as needed to further the intent of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq., that scrap tires be reused or recycled rather than disposed. 
Sec. 13-135. - Scrap tire storage. 
(a)  No person may store more than 100 scrap tires anywhere in this county. Any persons storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A tire retailer with not more than 2,000 scrap tires stored in a shipping container and not more than 1,000 scrap tires in storage, if such retailer complies with EPD Rule 391-3-4-.19(3). 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; and 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage. 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the EPD so long as the number of scrap tires in storage does not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(c)  Scrap tires illegally dumped or stored on private property shall be removed by the occupant, agent, or owner of said property and transported to an end user, recycler, processor, sorter or disposal facility approved by the EPD. The person responsible for the abatement of illegally dumped or stored scrap tires shall retain copies of the manifest or receipt which shows the disposition of the scrap tires. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 13-136. - Criteria for approved processing, sorting, and disposal facilities. 
(a)  Processing operations. Processing shall include, but is not limited to, shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting and sorting operations; and pyrolysis, microwave, and cryogenic operations. 
(1)  Scrap tires staged indoors will be managed under conditions that meet those in the "The Standard for Storage of Rubber Tires," NFPA 231D-1986 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Battery March Park, Quincy, Massachusetts. 
(2)  All scrap tire processing or disposal facilities which stage scrap tires or processed tires outdoors must comply with the following standards: 
a.  An outdoor scrap tire pile or processed tire pile will have no greater than the following maximum dimensions: 
1.  Width: 50 feet 
2.  Area: 5,000 square feet; and 
3.  Height: 15 feet 
a.  A 50-foot wide fire lane will be placed around the perimeter of each scrap tire pile. Access to the fire lane for emergency vehicles must be unobstructed at all times. In the event of fire, the owner or operator shall, upon receipt of notification of a fire, immediately take all necessary steps to control and extinguish the fire, including all oil and other residue created by the fire. 
c.  The owner or operator will control mosquitoes and rodents so as to protect the public health and welfare. 
(3)  Processors staging scrap tires indoors or outdoors must meet the following standards: 
a.  No operations involving the use of open flames will be conducted within 25 feet of a scrap tire pile. 
b.  An approach and access road to the scrap tire processing facility will be kept passable for any motor vehicle at all times. 
c.  Access to the facility will be controlled through the use of fences, gates, or other means. 
d.  An attendant will be present when the scrap tire processing facility is open for business if the facility receives tires from persons other than the operator of the facility. 
e.  The facility will be bermed or given other adequate protection to keep liquid runoff from a potential tire fire from entering waters of the state. 
f.  Fire protection services for the facility will be assured through notification to local fire protection authorities. A fire safety survey will be conducted. 
g.  Communication equipment will be maintained at the scrap tire processing facility to assure that the facility operator can contact local fire protection authorities in case of a fire. 
h.  The scrap tire processing facility will be kept free of long grass, underbrush and other potentially flammable vegetation at all times. 
i.  The operator of the facility will prepare and keep at the facility an emergency preparedness manual. The manual will be updated at least once annually or upon changes in operations at the site. The manual will contain the following elements: 
1.  A list of names and numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of a fire, flood or other emergency; 
2.  A list of the emergency response equipment at the facility, its location, and how it should be used in the event of a fire or other emergency; and 
3.  A description of the procedures that should be followed in the event of a fire, including procedures to contain and dispose of the oily material generated by the combustion of large numbers of tires. 
4.  Any residuals from scrap tire processing must be managed so as to be contained on-site and must be controlled and disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility or be properly recycled. 
5.  A scrap tire processing facility may not accept any scrap tires for processing if it has reached its approved or permitted staging limit. At least 75 percent of both the scrap and processed tires that are accumulated by the scrap tire processing facility each calendar quarter and 75 percent by weight or volume of all scrap tires previously received and not recycled, reused or properly disposed during the preceding calendar quarter must be processed and removed from the facility for disposal or recycling during the quarter or disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility. 
6.  The owner or operator of a scrap tire processing facility will record and maintain for three years records that will be available for inspection by the Special Enforcement Division during normal business hours and will include the following information regarding their activities: 
i.  For all scrap tires received and processed tires shipped from the facility, the name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier who accepted the scrap or processed tires for transport and the quantity of scrap or processed tires shipped with that carrier; and the place where the scrap or processed tires were deposited; 
ii.  For all scrap and processed tires received at the facility, the name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier who delivered the scrap or processed tires to the facility, and the quantity or weight of scrap or processed tires received from that carrier, and, if more than five scrap tires were delivered by a person who is not a scrap tire carrier, the number of tires delivered and the person's name, address and telephone number; and 
iii.  For all scrap tires removed for reuse or recapping, the quantity and type removed and the name and location of the user receiving the tires. 
(b)  Sorting operations. 
(1)  Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires into separate groups (used tires, retreadable casing tires, scrap tires) must meet the requirements of paragraph (7)(a) of the EPD Rule 391-3-4-.19. However, in lieu of the 75 percent recycled, used or reused provision, the person sorting mixed tires shall: 
a.  Hold no more than 3,000 mixed tires prior to sorting; and 
b.  Hold no more than 3,000 scrap tires for consolidated transport to their final destination. 
(2)  Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires shall further: 
a.  Obtain a Scrap Tire Generator Identification Number issued by the EPD; and 
b.  Assure that the scrap tires are transported to a scrap tire end user, or recycler, processor, or disposal facility approved by the EPD; and 
c.  Comply with all other provisions applicable to scrap tire generators and processors. 
Sec. 13-137. - Reuse and recycling of scrap tires 
For purposes of this section, the following criteria will be used to determine if scrap tires are being reused or recycled: 
(1)  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires must have a known use, reuse, or recycling potential; must be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and must have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
(2)  Scrap tires or processed scrap tires are not accumulated speculatively if the person accumulating them can show there is a known use, reuse, or recycling potential for them, that they can be feasibly sold, used, reused, or recycled, and during the preceding 90 days, the amount of scrap tires or processed scrap tires recycled, sold, used, or reused equals at least 75 percent by weight or volume of the tires received during the 90 day period. 
(3)  Proof of recycling, sale, use, or reuse shall be provided in the form of bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the scrap tires in question to a recognized recycling facility or for proper use or reuse from the accumulation point. Proof must be provided that there is a known market or disposition for the scrap tires or processed scrap tires and must show that they have the necessary equipment to do so, prior to receiving scrap tires for processing. 
(4)  A scrap tire is "sold" if the generator of the scrap tire or the person who processed the scrap tire received consideration or compensation for the material because of its inherent value. 
(5)  A scrap tire is "used, reused, or recycled" if it is either: 
a.  Employed as an ingredient (including use as an intermediate) in a process to make a product (for example, utilizing crumb rubber to make rubber-asphalt); 
b.  Employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product (for example, utilizing shredded tires as a substitute for fuel oil, natural gas, coal, or wood in a boiler or industrial furnace) as long as such substitution does not pose a threat to human health or the environment, and so long as the facility is not solid waste thermal treatment technology facility or utilizing shredded tires as a soil amendment, aggregate, etc. 
c.  Reused for its original intended purpose as a used tire or reused for other purposes approved by the EPD, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, erosion control, etc. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 13-138. - Penalty. 
Violations of this article shall be punished as specified in section 1-8 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, 2-7-95) 
Secs. 13-139—13-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LITTER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 82-68, enacted Sept. 21, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—5 of said ordinance as Art. VI §§ 13-151—13-155, is at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission, § 2-131 et seq.; garbage and trash disposal generally, §§ 13-167.1 et seq.; loads spilled from vehicles onto streets, § 13-167.7(A)(3). 

Sec. 13-151. - Declaration of intent. 
It is the intention of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, by this article to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout Columbus, Georgia, of any and all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of Columbus, Georgia, and harm to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens caused by individuals who litter. 
(Ord. No. 82-68, § 1, 9-21-82) 
Sec. 13-152. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "litter" means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
(b)  The phrase "public or private property" means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, industrial, commercial, residential, farm or forest properties. 
(Ord. No. 82-68, § 2, 9-21-82) 
Sec. 13-153. - Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in Columbus, Georgia, or any waters in Columbus, Georgia, unless: 
(a)  Such property is designated by Columbus, Georgia, or by any of its agencies for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(b)  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; 
(c)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 82-68, § 3, 9-21-82) 
Sec. 13-154. - Prima facie evidence. 
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 13-153, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said conveyance shall have violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-68, § 4, 9-21-82) 
Sec. 13-155. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to section 1-8 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances and in the sound discretion of the court, such persons, upon being sentenced for a period of imprisonment may, as a part of that imprisonment, be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile per day, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution and implementation of the sentence; or said persons, in the sound discretion of the court may, as a part of that imprisonment, be directed to pick up and remove from any public park or any other public property or with the prior permission of the owner or tenant of any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the convicted person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by the convicted person or anyone prior to the date of the execution and implementation of the sentence. 
(Ord. No. 82-68, § 5, 9-21-82) 
Secs. 13-156—13-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 76-6, §§ 1, 2, enacted Jan. 28, 1976, repealed former Art. VII, §§ 13-167—13-172.2, relative to solid waste collection and disposal, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. VII, §§ 13-167.1—13-167.17, as herein set out. Former Art. VII was derived from Ord. No. 72-70, § 2, adopted May 2, 1972. 

Sec. 13-167. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-167.1. - Definitions. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(1)  Abandoned motorized vehicle shall mean any automobile, truck, or other motorized vehicle which has been left on public property for seven or more days. 
(2)  Bulk container shall mean a large nondisposable container which is usually measured in cubic yard capacity, is constructed of metal or other such materials as may be approved by the director of the department of public works, and is used for the storage of solid waste materials. 
(3)  Central Business District (CBD) shall mean that area of Columbus, Georgia, bounded by an area where businesses front on Ninth Street, Fourteenth Street, Broadway and Third Avenue. 
(4)  Certified agency (private contractors) shall mean a person licensed by Columbus, Georgia, and permitted by the department of public health to collect and dispose of solid waste materials. 
(5)  Commercial refuse shall mean all solid waste originating in businesses. The term includes, but is not limited to, solid waste originating in office buildings, stores, food service establishments, theaters, privately owned hospitals and other institutional units, and public and private schools. 
(6)  Composting shall mean the controlled decomposition of organic solid waste materials under aerobic conditions. 
(7)  Construction/demolition wastes shall mean waste materials resulting from the construction or razing of buildings, structures, and/or pavements. The term includes, but is not limited to, lumber, paper, plaster, and concrete. 
(8)  Disposable container shall mean a nonreusable watertight container constructed of plastic, paper, or other material as approved by the director of the department of public works and used for the storage of solid waste materials. 
(9)  Food service establishment means public or private establishments which prepare and serve meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products directly to the consumer either for carry out or service within the establishment. The term includes restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunchrooms; places which retail sandwiches or salads; soda fountains; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; and similar facilities by whatever name called. Within a food service establishment, there may be a food sales component, not separately operated. This food sales component shall be considered as part of the food service establishment. This term shall not include the following: 
(a)  A "food sales establishment" as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 26-2-21 and subject to regulation by the Georgia Commissioner of Agriculture, except as stated in this definition. The food service component of any food sales establishment defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-2-21 shall not be included in this exception; 
(b)  Any outdoor recreation activity sponsored by the state, a county, a municipality, or any department or entity thereof, any outdoor or indoor (other than school cafeteria food service) public school function, or any outdoor private school function; 
(c)  Any organization which is operating on its own property or on the property of a party that has provided written consent for the use of such property for such purpose and which is exempt from taxes under O.C.G.A. § 48-7-25(a)(1) or under section 501(d) or paragraphs (1) through (8) or paragraph (10) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code for the purpose of operating a house or other residential structures where seriously ill or injured children and their families are provided temporary accommodations in proximity to their treatment hospitals and where food is prepared, served, transported, or stored by volunteer personnel; 
(d)  Establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products if such preparation or serving is an authorized part of and occurs upon the site of an event which: 
1.  Is sponsored by a political subdivision of this state or by an organization exempt from taxes under of O.C.G.A. § 48-7-25(a)(1) or under section 501(d) or paragraphs (1) through (8) or paragraph (10) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as that code is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-1-2; 
2.  Is held on the property of such sponsor or on the property of a party that has provided written consent for use of such property for such event; 
3.  Lasts 120 hours or less; and 
4.  When sponsored by such an organization, is authorized to be conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the municipality or county in which it is conducted. 
(10)  Garbage shall mean all wastes resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking, sale, or serving of food. The term includes, but is not limited to, vegetable wastes, animal offal, animal excretions, carcasses of dead animals, and animal food wastes. The term, however, does not include human sewage. 
(11)  Incineration shall mean the controlled process by which solid, liquid, or gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed primarily into gases; the residue produced containing little or no combustible wastes. 
(12)  Junk shall mean any appliance, household items, furniture, scrap material that may have salvage value, or vehicle, except motorized vehicle, that is discarded or is no longer operative or capable of performing as originally designed and is stored in a fashion that is visible from the street or any property line. 
(13)  Junked motorized vehicles shall mean any automobile, truck, or other motorized vehicle which meets any two of the following conditions: is no longer operative; has no current license tag or state certificate of registration; is missing some critical part such as, but not limited to, wheels, engine, transmission, chassis, windshields or headlights; has flat tires; overgrown with vegetation; unknown ownership. 
(14)  Landfill shall mean a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or special wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
(14.1)  Litter shall mean that visible portion of solid waste which is discarded outside of the regular storage and disposal system. 
(15)  Nondisposable container shall mean a reusable watertight receptacle of a solid and durable grade metal, plastic, rubber, or other such material as may be approved by the director of the department of public works, and used for the storage of solid waste materials. 
(16)  Open burning shall mean any outdoor fire from which products of combustion are emitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack, chimney, duct, or other similar item. 
(17)  Permit shall mean the written authorization granted to a person by the department of public health, the department of public works, and/or the planning division, for construction of solid waste facilities, and/or collections and/or disposal of solid waste. 
(18)  Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, representative, agent, or assignee. 
(19)  Pruning shall mean the selective trimming of any tree, shrub, or vine for any purpose. 
(20)  Putrescible wastes shall mean wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. The term includes, but is not limited to, kitchen wastes, animal wastes, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
(21)  Rubbish/trash shall mean any nonputrescible item of solid waste. The term includes, but is not limited to, the following kinds of material: 
(a)  Combustible materials such as paper, cardboard, wood, yard trimmings and excelsior. 
(b)  Noncombustible material such as metal, cans, glass and crockery. 
(22)  Sanitary landfill shall mean a method of disposing of putrescible, nonputrescible and/or special wastes on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
(22.1)  Site plan shall mean a graphic representation of the facilities drawn to an architectural or engineering scale. 
(23)  Solid waste/refuse shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried human body wastes. The term includes, but is not limited to, garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, abandoned and/or junked motorized vehicles, demolition wastes, construction wastes, junk, stockpiled materials, special wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this article. 
(24)  Solid waste container shall mean disposable containers, nondisposable containers, bulk containers, and/or volume-reducing equipment meeting the specifications as set forth in this article. 
(25)  Special wastes shall mean hazardous wastes of a solid, liquid, or gaseous nature, including hot ashes, pesticides, sewage sludges, and chemicals which, by reason of their pathological, explosive, radioactive, or toxic nature, may cause injury or illness to collection and/or disposal personnel. 
(26)  Transfer station shall mean a facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(27)  Unauthorized accumulation of solid wastes shall mean the storage or accumulation of solid waste on any premises in Columbus, Georgia that: 
(a)  Creates unsanitary conditions as determined by the department of public health or the department of inspections and code; 
(b)  Creates fire hazards as determined by the department of public safety or the department of inspections and code; 
(c)  Causes offensive or obnoxious odors; 
(d)  Provides a breeding or harboring place for insects or vermin; or 
(e)  In any way adversely affects the health, safety, and welfare of the public as established by the appropriate and applicable standards of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. 
(28)  Volume-reducing equipment shall mean a machine capable of reducing the size or volume of solid waste. Volume-reducing equipment shall include shredders, compactors, and any other machine of similar performance. 
(29)  Fencing. Fencing shall mean a commercial, or commercial facsimile, privacy type fence and entrance gate such as of chain link with interwoven slats (also known as panelweave), brick, wood, or a living fence comprised of plant material, erected so as to provide complete screening of the view to the passing public. 
(30)  Vehicle wrecking or junk yard. A vehicle wrecking or junk yard shall consist of that part of a lot not enclosed by a building, which is used for the storage or dismantling of damaged or obsolete vehicles or for the sale of such vehicles or of the salvaged parts therefrom, but not including the storage of used vehicles in operable condition. 
(31)  Salvage/scrap yards. Salvage/scrap yards shall consist of buildings, structures, or premises where junk, waste, discarded or salvage materials are handled, including house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment yards, including the purchase or storage of used furniture or household equipment. 
(32)  Vehicle storage yards. Any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which seven or more inoperable motorized vehicles of any kind are placed. 
(33)  Repair shops. Repair shops shall consist of those activities which are commonly known as service stations, garage repair, and vehicle paint shops which deal with the repair of all vehicle types. 
(34)  Stockpiled materials shall mean unused objects not customarily stored outside such as indoor furniture in a state of deterioration, including but not limited to refrigerators, washers and dryers and partially dismantled equipment as well as any outdoor accumulation of such material on property which is visible from the street or any property line. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 1, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 81-2, § 1, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 3—5, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 87-166, § 1, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 88-34, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 18-6, § 1, 2-27-18; Ord. No. 18-30, §§ 1—4, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 13-167.2. - General provisions. 
(1)  The owner, his agent or occupant of each single-family household, business, industry and/or institution, and the owner, his agent or lessor of multifamily units shall provide a sufficient number of approved solid waste containers as specified by the department of public works to store all solid waste adequately and properly until removed by the department of public works or other certified agency. 
(a)  The Columbus Consolidated Government, its equipment, employees, and other persons under its control, shall at the request of the owner enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting garbage, which will be contained in receptacles or bulk containers as required by the sanitation division of the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(b)  The owner, his agent, or occupant of any business, industry, institution or multifamily complex, shall release the Columbus Consolidated Government from any claim of damage of any kind of nature that may result to the premises or persons located thereon, or for any other claim of damage that may result in the servicing of the above business, industry, institution, or multifamily complex because of the entry upon private property. 
(2)  The use of solid waste containers by residential, commercial, institutional and industrial land uses for collection by the department of public works shall be limited to the following: 
(a)  Single-family, two-family and three-family housing units —Disposable containers, nondisposable containers and volume-reducing equipment. 
(b)  Townhouses and condominiums —Disposable containers, nondisposable containers, bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment. 
(c)  Multifamily with four to ten housing units —Nondisposable containers, bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment. 
(d)  Multifamily with 11 or more housing units —Bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment, unless specifically exempted by the department of public works. 
(e)  Commercial within the central business district —Disposable containers, bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment. 
(f)  Commercial outside the central business district and industrial —Disposable containers, nondisposable containers, bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment. 
(3)  All solid waste containers shall: 
(a)  Be maintained in a sanitary condition by the owner, owner's agent, or occupant as required by the provisions herein; 
(b)  Be easily accessible to the collection vehicle on the day of collection, as determined by the department of public works; 
(c)  Be protected at all times from weather conditions, animals and circumstances that may cause it to be littered. 
(4)  All food service establishments shall: 
(a)  Use disposable containers as liners in all nondisposable containers in which garbage is stored; 
(b)  Place all garbage in disposable containers, securely tied, before placing garbage in bulk containers; 
(c)  Not use disposable containers as a permanent means of storing garbage except where there is a scheduled daily pickup and except where used with volume-reducing equipment; and 
(d)  Dispose of wastes that result from the cleaning of solid waste containers into a sanitary or combination sewer or provide such other alternatives as approved by the department of public health that are capable of maintaining a sanitary condition. 
(5)  All yard waste (hereinafter defined as leaves, grass clippings, pine needles and similar yard trimmings resulting from pruning or similar yard activities and rubbish and trash) shall be collected on scheduled days by the department of public works. Such materials may be placed in approved solid waste containers or disposable yard waste bags. 
(6)  All branches, limbs, and shrubbery cut while pruning and not meeting the specifications enumerated in paragraph (7) below shall be disposed of by the owner or his agent. All trees cut or cleared must be disposed of by the owner or agent. 
(a)  All branches, limbs and trunks from the removal of trees by the owner or his agent may be collected by the department of public services for a fee established by Columbus City Council. (See section 13-169.1(j)). 
(b)  All branches, limbs and trunks of trees to be collected by the department of public services shall be: 
(1)  Cut into lengths of four feet or less; and, 
(2)  Placed at the curb side for collection. 
(7)  All branches, limbs, and shrubbery to be collected by the department of public works shall: 
(a)  Be cut into lengths of four feet or less; 
(b)  Not exceed six inches in diameter; and 
(c)  Be placed at the curb side for collection. 
All such items will, upon request, be removed by the department of public works. 
(8)  All nurseries, landscape gardening firms, clearing, grading and building contractors, and logging and pulpwood related operations shall remove all solid waste which they accumulate through their work. 
(9)  All commercial refuse stored outdoors at food service establishments shall be enclosed by a fence a minimum of five feet in height with openings for access only. The fence shall be kept in good order at all times by the owner, or his agent or lessor. 
(10)  All paper cartons and cardboard boxes deposited in or alongside solid waste containers shall be broken down, flattened, tied into manageable bundles, and placed in the pick-up area or adjacent to the curb as required herein. 
(11)  Collection and disposal of junk shall be regulated as follows: 
(a)  Junk that will not fit into approved containers shall be placed adjacent to said containers for collection. 
(b)  Junk weighing less than 100 pounds which cannot be collected by the standard garbage packer truck services shall, upon request, be collected by the department of public works, said services shall be arranged by the owner or occupant of the premises with the department of public works. 
(c)  Those solid waste items which cannot be safely handled by the equipment and/or personnel of the department of public works, or those items which the department of public works is not required to collect must be transported by the owner or occupant of the premises or by his agent to city authorized disposal sites. 
(d)  All iceboxes, refrigerators, ice chests, deep freeze units, or cold storage vaults or chests, equipped with a device which automatically locks it when the door is closed shall not be put out on the city right-of-way for collection unless such locks have been removed or door has been permanently fastened or removed. 
(12)  In cases where the owner of a building having two or more tenants furnishes custodial service for each dwelling unit, including the placing of containers at a central collection point, it shall be the duty of the custodian or other person charged by the owner with this responsibility, to perform such service in compliance with this article. This, however, shall not relieve the owner or occupants of such dwelling units of their responsibility under the provisions of this article. Where two or more dwelling units in any building or other premises are occupied and the aforesaid custodial service is not furnished, or in any case where the placing of containers for collection does not clearly indicate the premises from which they came, the occupant of each dwelling unit shall plainly mark his containers for identification and ownership. This may be accomplished by marking the solid waste containers with the name of the resident and/or the number of the dwelling unit in which the occupant resides. Containers not properly marked may be removed by the department of public works. 
(13)  Reserved. 
(14)  All solid waste containers and related facilities shall be located off the public right-of-way and no nearer than 20 feet to a corner right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 2, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 81-2, § 2, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 6—8, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 04-83, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 12-32, § I, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 15-34, § I, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 13-167.3. - Container specifications and handling requirements. 
In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in sections 13-167.2 and 13-167.15, disposable and nondisposable containers, bulk containers, and volume-reducing equipment shall meet the following additional requirements and specifications: 
(A)  Disposable and nondisposable containers : 
(1)  Disposable containers shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Disposable household waste containers must be constructed of either plastic (copolymer, ethylene plastic or polyethylene) or two-ply, 50-pound wet strength extensible paper; 
(b)  Disposable yard waste containers may be biodegradable, such as paper yard waste bags; and 
(c)  No disposable container shall exceed a capacity of more than 32 gallons nor weigh more than 100 pounds when filled. 
(2)  Nondisposable containers shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Household waste containers shall be constructed of a solid and durable grade metal, plastic, or rubber and be equipped with suitable handles and a tight-fitting, insect proof cover with a handle and constructed of the same material as the container; 
(b)  Yard waste may be placed in standard trash cans without liners and such containers must be equipped with a handle but need not have a cover; 
(c)  All nondisposable containers shall have a minimum capacity of 15 gallons and a maximum of 32 gallons; and weigh not more than 100 pounds when filled. 
(3)  Placement and removal of disposable and nondisposable containers for and after solid waste collection shall be regulated as follows: 
(a)  All containers shall be located off the public right-of-way or shall be left inside the building and/or structure until the day of collection. 
(b)  All containers shall be placed adjacent to the curb in front of the property from which they originated for collection or as otherwise designated by the department of public works. 
(c)  In no case shall containers be placed in such a position so as to obstruct the sidewalk, the gutter, or the free movement of traffic. 
(d)  All containers shall be removed from the public right-of-way on the same day as collection. 
(e)  Disposable containers within the central business district shall be placed at curbside no earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the scheduled day of collection as established by the department of public works. 
(f)  In residential zoning districts, disposable and non-disposable containers may be placed at curbside no earlier than 5:30 p.m. the day preceding collection. 
(g)  Rubbish, limbs, yard waste or other debris that is collected by mechanical means shall not be placed under low hanging wires or tree branches, next to mail boxes, cable boxes, fences, water meters, electrical boxes, drainage structures or similar structures that would prohibit the safe use of mechanical collection equipment. Rubbish, limbs, yard waste or other debris shall not be placed next to trees, shrubs or plants that may be damaged during the collection process. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Condemnation of nondisposable containers shall be as follows: 
(a)  Nondisposable containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having sharp edges capable of causing injury to collection personnel or damage to collection equipment, or to such extent that the lid will not fit tightly or securely, or to the extent that they are not watertight, will be condemned. 
(b)  In order to condemn privately owned solid waste containers, the department of public health and/or department of public works shall attach a notification tag to the container one collection time prior to actual pickup. If said tagged container is used a second time after the notification tag has been placed on the container, said container shall be picked up and disposed of by the department of public works and/or the department of public health. 
(6)  Disposable and nondisposable containers located below ground shall be prohibited from use after January 1, 1982. The city manager shall have the authority to waive this prohibition as to a specific location upon a showing by an applicant that the specific location does not constitute a health hazard and does not collect water seepage. The approval of the city manager shall be effective for 24 months, with the right of the city manager to revoke the approval at any time if it ceases to meet the standards set forth herein. 
(B)  Bulk containers: 
(1)  The specifications for bulk containers shall be as follows: 
(a)  Be constructed of metal and be equipped with a minimum one-inch diameter drain; 
(b)  Have a three, four or six cubic yard capacity; solid waste in containers exceeding these capacities shall not be collected by the department of public works; and 
(c)  Be compatible with the department of public works' solid waste collection equipment. 
(2)  Bulk containers shall carry the name and address of the premises served for easy identification. 
(3)  Bulk containers used for storing garbage shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Be located on concrete pads meeting the following minimum specifications: 
1.  Three and four cubic yard capacity containers and be located on a pad at least ten feet by ten feet by four inches; 
2.  Six cubic yard capacity containers shall be located on a pad at least 14 feet by 12 feet by four inches; 
3.  Concrete pads shall be constructed with a three-inch high concrete curb around their perimeter or be constructed three inches higher than the existing grade; and 
4.  Equipped with a four inch diameter floor drain located 12 inches from rear of pad and connected to a sanitary or combination sewer, and constructed so that the pad slopes enough to provide proper water movement toward the drain. 
(b)  If more than one bulk container is used and located adjacent to the aforementioned pads, they shall be located on: 
1.  A four inch thick concrete pad; 
2.  A pad that will be adequate to contain all containers and is approved by the department of public works; and 
3.  A pad that will be compatible with the department of public works' collection equipment. 
(c)  Have hot and cold water facilities at the pad, or have provisions made for steam cleaning, or have provisions made for the use of chemicals and/or equipment capable of maintaining sanitary conditions. 
(4)  The preceding requirements, under subparagraph (3), may be waived when bulk containers are: 
(a)  Used solely for the purpose of storing solid waste materials other than garbage; 
(b)  Located on a concrete, asphalt, or other foundation material of equal durability that is capable of supporting the container and is compatible with the department of public works' collection equipment; 
(c)  Maintained in a sanitary condition; and 
(d)  Provided for condominium, townhouse and multifamily dwelling units with four or more housing units. 
(C)  Volume-reducing equipment: 
(1)  Volume-reducing equipment used for garbage shall: 
(a)  Be located on a concrete pad that is adequate to support and contain the equipment and is constructed with a three-inch high concrete curb around the perimeter or is constructed three inches higher than the existing grade; 
(b)  Be served by hot and cold running water, have provisions made for steam cleaning, or have provisions made for the use of chemicals and/or equipment capable of maintaining sanitary conditions; and 
(c)  Be located on a concrete pad equipped with a minimum four-inch diameter floor drain connected to a sanitary or combination sewer. 
(2)  The aforementioned requirements for volume reducing equipment may be waived when the conditions stated in subsection (B)(4) above, under bulk containers, are met. 
(3)  Volume-reducing equipment shall conform to the requirements specified in section 13-167.2, subsection (9), unless maintained in a sanitary condition, free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 3, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 79-103, § 1, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 81-2, § 3, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 81-9, § 1, 2-3-81; Ord. No. 12-32, § II, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 15-34, § II, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 15-35, § 1, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 15-50, § 1, 10-13-15) 
Sec. 13-167.4. - Certified agencies (private contractors). 
(A)  General provisions: 
(1)  All solid waste containers and collection equipment shall be maintained by the owner, his agent, occupant, or the lessee in a sanitary condition in conformance with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(2)  Private contractors shall mark their bulk containers and volume-reducing equipment for easy identification, including the name and telephone number of the contractor. 
(3)  All vehicles and containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage shall be equipped with closed bodies and be constructed so as to be easily cleaned. 
(4), (5) Reserved. 
(6)  Private contractors may be permitted: 
(a)  To use any size and type bulk container and volume reducing equipment their collection equipment will handle; and 
(b)  To be exempted from the following provisions of section 13-167.3 provided that an alternative method of sanitization that equals or exceeds the requirements set forth in this article is used and is approved by the department of public health. 
1.  Subsection (B), paragraphs (3)(a), (b), and (c). 
2.  Subsection (C), paragraphs (1)(a), (b), and (c). 
(B)  Licensing and permitting requirements and procedures: 
(1)  No private contractor collecting and/or disposing of solid waste shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any solid waste from a household, institution, or commercial enterprise within Columbus, Georgia, or dispose of the same in any manner or place without: 
(a)  Obtaining a business license from Columbus, Georgia; and 
(b)  Obtaining a written permit from the department of public health to collect and/or dispose of solid waste. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(b)  Type of solid waste to be collected; 
(c)  Method of collection; 
(d)  Types of vehicles and/or containers to be used; 
(e)  Method of disposal; 
(f)  Location of disposal site; 
(g)  Sufficient liability insurance to cover damage to others which may be incurred by the applicant; and 
(h)  Any and all other pertinent information as may be required by the department of public health. 
(3)  No permit shall be granted if the following do not conform to the requirements set forth in this article: 
(a)  Method of collection; 
(b)  Place and method of disposal; and 
(c)  Collection equipment. 
(4)  No certified agency shall make changes in the arrangements for the disposal of solid waste collected without first receiving the written approval of the department of public health and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Permits for the collection and disposal of solid waste may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the department of public health if it is determined by the enforcing departments that the provisions of this article will not or are not being complied with. 
(C)  Frequency of collection: 
(1)  The frequency of collection other than the minimums specified in paragraph (2) below shall be of mutual agreement between the contractor and the client and shall depend upon the type of solid waste and the holding capacity of the container. 
(2)  Following is an enumeration by type of container of the minimum frequency of collection required for various solid waste materials. More frequent collections may be required if it is determined by the department of public health to be essential for the prevention of insect breeding, rat harborage, odors, littering, or anything else which may be hazardous to public health. 
(a)  Nondisposable and bulk containers: 
1.  Garbage only—Twice weekly. 
2.  Rubbish/trash with garbage—Twice weekly. 
3.  Rubbish/trash only—As often as necessary to prevent the above conditions under this paragraph from developing. 
(b)  Volume-reducing equipment: Solid waste from volume-reducing equipment shall be collected as often as necessary to prevent the above conditions under this paragraph from developing. 
(D)  Notices: Certified agencies shall provide each client with a copy of the following requirements concerning the storage and collection of solid waste as specified in this article: 
(1)  Definitions. 
(2)  Unauthorized accumulation, and removal of solid wastes. 
(3)  Scheduled day of collection. 
(4)  Materials acceptable for collection. 
(5)  Materials not acceptable for collection. 
(6)  Preparation of solid waste for collection. 
(7)  Necessary safeguards for collection. 
(E)  Transfer stations: 
(1)  In addition to meeting the requirements set forth under the zoning ordinance of Columbus, Georgia, and other applicable ordinances and regulations, plans, specifications and other pertinent information which may be required for construction of transfer stations shall be submitted to and approved by the department of public health before construction on said facilities commences. 
(2)  The following conditions shall be met at transfer stations: 
(a)  Solid waste shall be confined to the interior of said facilities. 
(b)  Sewage and hazardous wastes shall be excluded from transfer stations and shall be transported directly to city authorized disposal sites. 
(c)  Said facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; dust, odors, insects, rodents and similar conditions being controlled at all times. 
(d)  Whenever a noxious odor emanating from such a facility can be smelled at a distance of 100 feet from the property line of the facility and three or more residents or business owners within said distance make a signed complaint which is verified by an official of the public health department or the Columbus Consolidated Government, the facility shall be in violation of this section and the owner or manager shall be subject to citation to the Environmental Court Division of the Recorder's Court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(e)  Upon a third conviction for violation of this Code section in any 12-month period, the business license of such a facility shall be subject to revocation by the Columbus Council. For purposes of this Code section, the term "conviction" shall include a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or a bond forfeiture. 
(F)  Site plan procedures and requirements. Private contractors shall follow the same site plan procedure and requirements as those set forth in section 13-167.15 of this article. 
(G)  Permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, whether by rule or otherwise, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 4, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 81-2, § 4, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 11-53, § 1, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 13-167.5. - Solid waste disposal. 
(A)  General provisions: 
(1)  No person shall hereafter establish or operate any solid waste disposal facility unless it is approved by the department of public health and the department of public works and is in compliance with the rules and regulations set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources', Environmental Protection Division, Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste Management and Rules and Regulations for Air Quality Control. 
(2)  No person shall hereafter establish or operate any solid waste disposal facility without first submitting plans and specifications to the department of public health and receiving its written approval concerning the disposal site, methods of disposal, adequacy of equipment, supervision, and any other pertinent information the department of public health may consider necessary. 
(3)  The department of public health shall have the authority to close or cause to be closed, abandoned, improved, repaired, or revised any solid waste disposal facility or collection equipment which does not comply with this article or which is a nuisance or is hazardous to public health. 
(4)  The following activities shall be prohibited at the Columbus Landfill: 
(a)  Using the landfill to deposit any debris, trash, or waste other than as directed by employees of the City of Columbus. 
(b)  Possession of a firearm on landfill premises which is unauthorized under state law. 
(c)  Depositing or dumping any type of explosive in the landfill. 
(d)  Transporting onto or consuming alcoholic beverages on the premises of the landfill. 
(e)  Removing any material from the landfill and all forms of scavenging. 
(f)  Entering the landfill other than during its normal hours of operation. 
(g)  The use of any city equipment by persons other than authorized city employees. 
(h)  Failing to secure a load so as to cause any form of littering. 
(i)  The use of city employees, and county or state inmates for unloading waste, debris, or trash from private vehicles. 
(B)  Method of disposal: Unless determined to be consistent with the intent of this article, alternative methods for the disposal of solid waste shall be limited to the following methods: 
(1)  Composting: 
(a)  Solid waste intended for composting shall be maintained in a condition free of insects, rodents, offensive odors and other nuisances prior to, during, and after the composting operation. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of the by-products removed during the processing of the compost shall be in accordance with the solid waste handling procedures as set forth in this article. 
(2)  Incineration: Plans, specifications, and other pertinent information necessary to evaluate the project shall be submitted to the department of public health for their review and shall be approved by the appropriate state governing body before construction commences. 
(3)  Landfill: 
(a)  Materials deposited for landfill purposes shall be compacted to the extent as may be required by the department of public health. 
(b)  Landfills shall be covered with earth and compacted at least once a month. Depending upon the type of waste deposited, however, the department of public health may require that landfills be covered with earth and compacted more frequently in order to prevent insects, rodents, odors, erosion, littering, or anything else which may be hazardous to public health from developing. 
(4)  Sanitary landfill: 
(a)  Sanitary landfills shall consist of uniform layers of compacted putrescible, nonputrescible and/or special wastes not exceeding two feet in thickness. 
(b)  At the conclusion of each day, a six inch uniform cover of compacted earth free of solid waste shall be placed over the exposed waste that was accumulated during the day. 
(c)  The final cover shall consist of a uniform layer of compacted clean earth cover not less than two feet in depth. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 5, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 3-25-86) 
Sec. 13-167.6. - Open burning prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall cause, allow, or permit the open burning of any material including, but not limited to, garbage, junk, leaves, rubbish/trash, construction, or demolition waste within Columbus, Georgia, except for the following reasons: 
(a)  Recreational purposes or for cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(b)  Operation of devices using an open flame including, but not limited to, tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, and portable heaters, and air curtain destructors; 
(c)  Fires set for the purpose of training public fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate government entity and the guidelines set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources are strictly observed; 
(d)  Open burning shall be permitted on construction sites or for land clearing activities if an approved air curtain destructor as defined by the department of natural resources is used, and is in compliance with their regulations for use of said equipment. Prior to operating said device, a permit must be obtained from the Columbus Fire Department's Fire Prevention Division; 
(e)  In addition to meeting the above provisions, open burning allowed under this section shall comply with the rules and regulations set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, "Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste Management" and "Rules and Regulations of Air Quality Control." 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 77-21, § 1, 2-15-77; Ord. No. 78-20, § 6, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 80-16, § 1, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 80-72, § 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 86-12, § 9, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 13-167.7. - Unauthorized accumulation, disposal, removal of solid waste and junk and establishment of rules and regulations, governing vehicle wrecking, salvage, junk, scrap, storage yards, and repair shops. 
(A)  Unauthorized accumulation and disposal of solid waste and other materials: 
(1)  No person shall deposit on, bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in any land, public square, street, sidewalk, alley, lane, vacant or unoccupied lot, or into any lake, watercourse, storm sewer, catch basin, or drainage ditch any noxious materials, odorous or offensive liquids, or solid waste materials, except in approved solid waste containers. 
(2)  No person shall permit any solid waste or junk to remain on any private property for which he has responsible charge as lessee, tenant, owner, or occupier except that stored and handled for removal as provided herein. 
(3)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load contents or litter from being blown, deposited or spilled upon any street, alley or any other public place. No person shall allow to be spilled from any truck or any other vehicle, any abrasive materials, such as sand, rocks or gravel, but not limited thereto, which might harm or do damage to the streets or the paint markings thereon. Hopper drains on all collection vehicles shall be closed while traveling on the public right-of-way. 
(4)  No person shall deposit or allow to be deposited onto any public right-of-way any dirt or sand or gravel or other material with similar characteristics in an amount that would create a hazard to traffic, damage to vehicles, damage the roadway, or damage pavement markings, and this prohibition shall apply to such material which falls from moving or standing vehicles or to such material which falls from or flows from or is transferred from private property onto public rights-of-way irrespective of whether such transfer is accomplished entirely by human or mechanical conveyance or is produced in part by natural forces such as rainfall or surface water or streams. 
(5)  No person shall keep, deposit on, or allow to be deposited on private or public property any junked motorized vehicle within Columbus, Georgia except in accordance with the requirements as set forth under subsection (B) of this section. 
(6)  No person shall deposit or allow to be deposited in the Columbus Landfill any hazardous waste as defined under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60, et seq. 
(7)  (i)  Stockpiled Materials will not be permitted on residential properties unless completely enclosed in an approved accessory building as defined by Section 13.1.1 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(ii)  Violators of this Code section shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  Upon conviction, guilty plea or bond forfeiture for a first offense within a 30-day period, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed by the Recorder. 
(b)  Upon conviction, guilty plea or bond forfeiture for a second offense within a 30-day period, a fine of $750.00 shall be imposed by the Recorder. 
(c)  Upon conviction, guilty plea or bond forfeiture for a third offense within a 30-day period, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed by the Recorder. 
(d)  Upon conviction, guilty plea or bond forfeiture for a fourth or subsequent offense within a 30-day period, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed by the Recorder along with a minimum jail sentence of ten days. 
(B)  Junked motorized vehicles: 
(1)  Those vehicles meeting any two of the following conditions shall be deemed to be an unauthorized accumulation of solid waste: 
(a)  Not having a current license tag or a state certificate of registration; 
(b)  Missing some critical part such as, but not limited to, wheels, engine, transmission, or chassis; 
(c)  Having unknown ownership; 
(d)  Overgrown with vegetation; 
(e)  The junk motorized vehicle is the subject of a signed written complaint from responsible adults residing on or owning two separate properties having direct view of the vehicle from their premises who agree to testify in court; 
(f)  No longer operational; 
(g)  Has flat tires. 
(2)  Exempted from the provisions shall be: 
(a)  Vehicles that are located in an enclosed building or on properties which are zoned commercial and screened properly from public view in accordance with the fencing requirement in section 13-167.1(29). 
(b)  Reserved. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot in the city, or owner of any lot in the city, or agent or representative of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any junked motorized vehicle. 
(4)  When any junked motorized vehicle is being maintained on any lot in violation of the preceding paragraph, it shall be the duty of the director of the public services department, or his representative, to notify the violator of any such violation. Violators shall be given a written warning and allowed 15 days to correct the violation. No further written notice or warning period to correct shall be required during a period of 36 months after the initial written notice pertaining to that vehicle. Should the violator or his representative or agent fail to remove the junked motorized vehicle so as to comply with the requirements of the preceding paragraph, such party shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(C)  Fencing requirements: 
(1)  Vehicle wrecking, salvage, junk, scrap and storage yards, as defined in section 13-167.1(30), (31) and (32) shall be required to enclose by a fence as described in section 13-167.1(29), with openings only for the ingress and egress. Such openings shall have gates constructed in the same manner as the fence, and shall be closed when not in use. Such fence shall be at least six feet in height, kept in good order and repair as not to blight the area. There shall be no storage outside of the fence and the fence shall be no closer than 20 feet to a corner right-of-way line. Fences shall be constructed so as to screen from public view the uses stated. 
(2)  Repair shops as defined in section 13-167.1(33), having junked motorized vehicles as defined in section 13-167.1(13), shall be required to store said vehicles in a building or behind a fence as defined in section 13-167.1(29), with openings only for ingress and egress. Such openings shall have gates constructed in the same manner as the fence, and shall be closed when not in use. Such fences shall be at least six feet in height, kept in good order and repair as not to blight the area. Fences shall be constructed as to screen from the public view the uses stated. 
(3)  A "living fence" may be substituted in lieu of commercial, or commercial facsimile privacy type fence, but shall be required to be of the materials listed below, unless a substitute is approved by the cooperative extension service. Entrance gates shall be required with a "living fence", and shall comply with the requirements of a commercial or commercial facsimile material. 
Plant materials suitable for a living fence with expected height of plants for eight to ten feet high in three years. 
(a)  Full sun: 
1.  Burfordi holly. 
2.  Ligustrum lucidum (wax leaf privet). 
c. Leyland cypress. 
(b)  Semi-shade: 
1.  Ligustrum lucidum (wax leaf privet). 
2.  Burfordi holly. 
3.  Fosteri holly 
4.  Cleyera. 
(c)  Shade: 
1.  Myrica cerifera (southern wax myrtle). 
2.  Ligustrum lucidum (wax leaf privet). 
3.  Luster leaf holly. 
(d)  Size: Minimum three-gallon container; Minimum plant size two to three feet tall. 
(e)  Plant spacing: Four to six feet on center. 
(4)  Fences erected after December 1, 1987, by businesses as stated in this section, must be constructed so as to comply with this subsection. Businesses with existing fences shall be required to be in compliance by July 1, 1990. 
(D)  Removal of unauthorized accumulation of solid waste, junk, and stockpiled materials: 
(1)  Where the owner or occupant of any property violating the provisions hereof relating to the removal of such unauthorized solid wastes or junk cannot be served with notice of summons so as to subject him to punishment by the recorder, the director of the department of inspections and code enforcement or public works or one of their assistants shall notify such owner by certified mail, at the address shown in the tax commissioner's records, with a copy to the occupant, directing that the unauthorized accumulated solid wastes, junk, or stockpiled materials be removed so as to comply herewith. If within ten days from the date of mailing the notice, the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice and this article, the directors of public works or inspections and code enforcement shall have the accumulated solid waste or junk removed, assessing a fee plus a service charge (as recommended annually by the directors of public works, inspections and code enforcement and finance and approved by the city manager) for the work and charging the amount to the owner, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the lot, from the date of the removal, and if such amount is not paid within 30 days after completion of the work, the Finance Director of the Columbus Consolidated Government shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered and against the owner thereof. Such real estate shall then be levied on, advertised, and sold under such executions as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due Columbus, Georgia, with the same procedure, including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of Columbus, Georgia, to purchase at the sale. 
(2)  Any violation of this Code section shall constitute a nuisance subject to abatement at the complaint of any private citizen or the department of inspections and code in accordance with the same procedures outlined in section 13-117 above. 
(E)  Removal of abandoned and/or junked motorized vehicles: 
(1)  Removal of abandoned motorized vehicles. Abandoned motorized vehicles left on public property may be removed by the department of public works. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 7, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 81-2, § 5, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 84-20, § 1, 4-3-84; Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 10—14, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 86-26, § 2, 3-25-86; Ord. No. 87-166, § 2, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 91-26, 4-9-91; Ord. No. 91-75, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 00-59, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 18-6, §§ 2, 3, 2-27-18; Ord. No. 18-30, §§ 5—7, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 18-49, § 1, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 13-167.8. - Collection and disposal of construction and demolition wastes from private property. 
(a)  Columbus, Georgia, shall not be responsible for the collection and hauling of construction or demolition wastes originating from private property preliminary to, during, or subsequent to the construction of new, remodeled, or renovated structures. Said materials shall be removed by the contractor, owner, lessee or occupant of said property. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for multi-family, commercial, or industrial development until the aforesaid materials are removed by the owner or contractor. 
(c)  Before dirt, rock, or plaster may be deposited on private property, permission of the owner thereof must first be obtained. When these or other solid waste materials are deposited for the purpose of disposal or providing landfills, it must be done in accordance with the requirements and regulations set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 8, 2-28-78) 
Sec. 13-167.9. - Collection and disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Collection personnel of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, may enter private property, houses, and other structures at the request of the owner or occupant for the purpose of removing dead animals. 
(b)  A fee may be established by the city manager for the collection, removal, and disposal of large dead animals. The schedule of fees shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76) 
Sec. 13-167.10. - Collection and disposal of special wastes. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed any special wastes of any other dangerous materials of any kind with material to be collected by Columbus, Georgia. Columbus, Georgia, will not be responsible for the collection or disposal of such materials. Procedures for transporting and disposing of such materials may be obtained through the department of public safety, fire division, the department of public works, and/or the department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76) 
Sec. 13-167.11. - Unauthorized use of solid waste containers. 
(a)  No persons, other than agents of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, charged with such duties, or a private, licensed contractor, shall move, molest, burn, deposit, or interfere with any solid waste container or its contents or any solid waste set out to be collected by the collection personnel unless authorized by the director of the department of public services. 
(b)  Any person conducting salvage operations by collecting materials after such materials have been placed for collection by the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, or certified agency, or by a private licensed contractor, must obtain a license for such operations from Columbus, Georgia, in accordance with the policies and instructions issued by the department of public services and the department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 86-12, § 16, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 13-167.12. - Unauthorized activities of collection personnel. 
Garbage and refuse collection personnel of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, are not permitted to enter any building for the collection of solid waste nor shall they accept any money or other things of value for their services from persons served. Collection personnel of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, may, at the discretion of the chief or his assistant, enter private property, houses, and other structures at the request of the owner or occupant for the purpose of removing dead animals. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 86-12, § 17, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 13-167.13. - Publication of specifications and schedules. 
The director of the department of public works shall publish and make available, upon request, specifications for approved disposable, nondisposable, and bulk containers, and volume reducing equipment. Changes to the established weekly schedules for collection shall be made available upon request by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76) 
Sec. 13-167.14. - Procedures for handling citizens' request for service and/or complaints. 
Citizens' complaints and requests concerning the collection and disposal of solid waste within Columbus, Georgia, and/or all other provisions of this article shall be handled and treated the following manner: 
(a)  Request for service, information, and/or complaints about service shall be directed to the department of public works of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 81-2, § 6, 1-13-81) 
Sec. 13-167.15. - Site plan requirements for solid waste storage. 
The following site plan requirements shall be met before a building permit will be issued for construction of multifamily, commercial or industrial buildings or facilities requiring the use of nondisposable containers, bulk containers and/or volume-reducing equipment used outdoors. 
(A)  Site plan requirements for establishments: 
(1)  Developers of establishments shall, in addition to meeting the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance of Columbus, Georgia, indicate the following items: 
(a)  Whom the solid waste facilities are to serve; 
(b)  Types of solid waste to be stored; 
(c)  Location of proposed solid waste containers on the property and its relation and dimensions to existing or proposed streets, drives, alleys, property lines and other structures; 
(d)  Concrete pads, fences, gates and drainage facilities as required by this article; and 
(e)  An approved site plan shall bear the signature of an assigned agent of the department of public health and the department of public works. 
(2)  Developers of proposed food service establishments shall submit at least one copy of the site plan and one set of construction plans (including equipment specifications) to the department of public health for their review and approval. 
(B)  Installation of all solid waste facilities, as required herein, shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy where such is required. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 78-20, § 9, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 81-2, § 7, 1-13-81) 
Sec. 13-167.16. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be accomplished by duly sworn and trained special enforcement officers provided by the department of public works, the department of inspections and code, and the department of public health or fire prevention division of the Columbus Fire Department. 
(b)  Training of said special enforcement officers shall be effected by the department of public safety, police division. Special enforcement officers shall be provided with badges and other equipment by the police division in order to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The department of public works, the department of inspections and code, the department of public health and the fire department are each severally responsible for and authorized to designate personnel to enforce the provisions hereof and to prosecute violators in the Recorders Court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 77-21, § 2, 2-15-77; Ord. No. 78-20, § 10, 2-28-78; Ord. No. 18-30, § 8, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 13-167.17. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent Columbus, Georgia, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article where the terms and conditions of this article are at variance with the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division as the same may now or hereafter be adopted, the more restrictive provisions of this article or said rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall be enforced, and any person violating the provisions of this article or such rules shall be punished as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76; Ord. No. 77-21, § 3, 2-15-77) 
Sec. 13-167.18. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article, or the application of same to any particular set of persons or circumstances, should, for any reason, be held invalid, such invalidity shall in no way affect the remaining portions of the article, and to such end the various provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 76-6, § 2, 1-28-76) 
Sec. 13-168. - Mobile containers. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Mobile container. Mobile container shall mean a polyethylene container, mounted on wheels and designed for ease of use and durability, of not less than 80 gallons, with a tight fitting lid. 
(2)  Multidwelling units. Means any building containing two but not more than ten permanent living units, not including motels. 
(b)  Use of mobile containers. 
(1)  All person in areas designated by the city manager shall use mobile containers for collection of garbage. The mobile containers must be of a type approved by the city manager. However, multidwelling units and commercial establishments shall use mobile containers or mechanical containers. 
(2)  Any person using a mobile container that is damaged or otherwise defective shall promptly report it to the city's refuse contractor. 
(3)  Residential garbage shall be collected only from approved garbage cans or mobile containers placed at curbside and located at points in an area adjacent to a driveway and not over five feet from the curbline or ten feet from the edge of the pavement or edge of a traveled way. 
(4)  No owner, occupant or tenant shall keep garbage cans or mobile containers in either front yards, or side yards which abut a public right-of-way, or between the building line in the adjoining public right-of-way, or upon any public right-of-way longer than 24 consecutive hours. Commercial containers are exempt from this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 2-26-80) 
Sec. 13-169. - Charges for service—Businesses, industries, and other nonresidential institutions. 
For the service of collection and disposal of garbage, trash, and other solid wastes, businesses, industries and all non residential institutions in the city requiring such services shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of $240.00 annually for up to two 32-gallon containers, and $120.00 per year for each additional 32-gallon container at the curbside or on city right-of- way. Collection will be done along with regular waste collection schedules. 
(2)  A minimum rate of $320.00 annually for up to two 32-gallon containers and $180.00 per year for each additional 32-gallon container, off city right-of-way or on private property. Collection will be done along with regular waste collection schedules. 
(3)  Effective July 1, 2012, a rate of $1.50 for each 32-gallon bag sticker to be used in the area designated as the Uptown Business District for six pickups per week (Monday through Saturday) at the curbside or on city right-of-way. Fees shall be adjusted annually for a period of two years, in accordance with the table shown below: 

 
(4)  A minimum rate of $2,500.00 per container for all establishments utilizing bulk containers. 
(5)  Off right-of-way/veterinary decal, annually $1,260.00 for twice per week collection service. In addition to the normal twice per week collection, a special pick up of biological waste will be offered on an as needed basis for $50.00 fee for additional pick up. 
All rates shall be effective on July 1, 2012, for collection and disposal except holidays authorized by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
All charges above the minimum rates as determined by the director of the department of public services shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the type and amount of refuse, the type of containers serviced and time required to provide service. The fee rates shall not exceed an amount proportional to the minimum charges provided in this section. A direct service charge will be made at the time of service for the pickup and disposal of any special wastes as outlined in sections 13-167.7 and 13-167.9 of this chapter. 
If a business, industry, or nonresidential institution is being served by a private solid waste collection company, or intends to be serviced as such, it will be the responsibility of said business, industry and nonresidential institution to report this in writing to the director of the department of public services. 
(Ord. No. 85-52, 5-21-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 88-43, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 91-48, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 93-53, § 2, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 99-41, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 12-32, § III, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 13-169.1. - Same—Residential. 
(a)  A charge for the services of collection and disposal of garbage, trash, and other solid waste including yard waste, in Columbus, Georgia for any residential property shall be as follows: 
(1)  A rate of $18.00 per month for a full cost collection service at the curb or on city right-of-way. 
(2)  An offset of 25 percent per month, rounded to the nearest dime, for a low-income household collection service at the curb or on the city right-of-way. 
A low income household is one which receives food stamps, aid to families with dependent children or has a total yearly income below the poverty income line guidelines for family units in the United States set by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, or its successor, said guidelines now being set forth presently in the Federal Register, Vol. 83, No. 12, January 18, 2018 (Document No. 2018-00814), pp. 2642-2644 as follows: 

 
Such guidelines will be adjusted annually according to the Federal Register. 
(b)  The above rates shall be assessed on all monthly water and sewer bills mailed on or after July 1, 2002, and shown as a separate and distinct item on said bill, and shall be paid in full by the due date as shown on said bill. 
(c)  In order to comply with the provisions of state law (HB-1394) $.07 per month of the above rate shall be reserved and used exclusively for mandated payments to the state for payment of the $.50 per ton fee on solid waste. 
(d)  Fifty cents per month of the above rate shall be reserved and used exclusively for landfill closure/post closure care and landfill expansion. 
(e)  Should the aforesaid charge of waste collection service not be paid by said due date, Columbus Water Works shall inform, in writing, the Department of Public Services of Columbus, Georgia. 
(f)  The department of public services shall issue a notice directing any such delinquent customer to appear before the board of public services at a specified date and time to show cause why water and sewer services should not be disconnected until any past due amount for said charges residential waste collection service have been paid in full. 
(g)  Should the department of public services, after giving any customer an opportunity for a show cause hearing, determine that disconnection of water and sewer services is appropriate, then the department of public services shall notify the Columbus Water Works of this determination and request the water works to disconnect the water and sewer services until all past due amounts are paid in full. 
(h)  The government of Columbus, Georgia, through the department of public services, shall be responsible for any cost of defense, losses, damages, etc. resulting from said disconnect if any customer should pursue an appeal and establish in the appropriate court that the disconnect was inappropriate or improper. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  The fees for collecting branches, limbs and trunks of trees to be removed from private property by the department of public services are as follows: 

 
(1)  An offset of 25 percent as described in section 13-169.1(2) shall be applied to low-income households. 
(2)  The above rates shall be assessed on the customers water and sewer bill and shown as a separate and distinct item on said bill, and shall be paid in full by the due date as shown on said bill. 
(3)  Should the aforesaid charge for tree disposal not be paid by said due date, action shall be taken as specified in section 13-169.1 (e), (f), and (g). 
(Ord. No. 91-36, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 92-39, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 94-21, 3-8-94; Ord. No. 99-41, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 00-66, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 01-55, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 02-58, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 03-43, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 04-54, § 1, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 04-83, § 2, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 05-52, 6-17-05; Ord. No. 05-63, § 1, 7-30-05; Ord. No. 06-57, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 07-40, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 09-32, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 10-30, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 11-30, 6-21-11); Ord. No. 12-32, § IV, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 13-29, § 1, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 14-29, § 1, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-30, § 1, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 16-24, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 17-26, § 1, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 13-170. - Charges for dumping of solid wastes at sanitary landfill—Schedule of fees. 
(a)  A person (including private or non-governmental nonprofit organizations, which are exempt from ad valorem taxes, including the Muscogee County School District) who shall direct a vehicle into a sanitary landfill for the purpose of dumping solid waste therein shall pay according to the following schedule: 
Tipping fee schedule. Tipping fees shall be adjusted annually in accordance with the following schedule. The tipping fees will remain at the July 1, 2014 levels until further action is taken to change the ordinance. 

 
Tires: 
Per ton ..... $110.00 
Off-road tires: 
Per ton ..... $270.00 
Special handling. Solid waste requiring special handling shall be charged per vehicle at the rate designated. The following solid waste, plus any like items, as determined by the city manager, shall be classified in the special handling category: 
(1)  Metal nuggets. 
(2)  All liquids to include soft drinks, wine, beer and juice, the handling of which must be scheduled 24 hours in advance by the landfill division. 
(3)  All animal entrails. 
(4)  Carpet strips and bundles. 
(5)  Cotton bales. 
(6)  Wastewater solids. 
(7)  Any food products or written documents that must be covered immediately, the handling of which must be scheduled 24 hours in advance by the landfill division. 
(8)  Tobacco products. 
(9)  Paint filters. 
(10)  Wire, cable, or metal bonds if consisting of more than 30 percent of the land. 
(11)  All products containing asbestos. 
(b)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia may upon request exempt by resolution private non-profit organizations which collect non-putrescible solid waste and inert waste from private property, from the non-putrescible and inert rates specified in this Code section. 
(c)  In compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39, the sum of $0.75 per ton, or such rate as may be later set by the Georgia State Legislature, tipping fees collected for putrescible and construction/demolition shall be reserved exclusively for payment of the state mandated surcharge. 
(d)  All rates shall be effective on July 1, 2012. Disposal will be available in accordance with posted schedules at each landfill except on Sundays and holidays authorized by the council. 
(Ord. No. 85-52, 5-21-85; Ord. No. 86-85, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 86-126, 11-11-86; Ord. No. 87-44, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 88-27, 3-15-88; Ord. No. 88-35, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 88-117, §§ 1, 2, 11-29-88; Ord. No. 88-129, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 90-70, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 90-102, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 93-53, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 98-50, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 98-80, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 99-41, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 01-54, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 03-45, § 4, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 12-32, § V, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 13-170.1. - Same—Exemptions. 
The nonputrescible waste tipping fees established by section 13-170 hereof shall not apply to disposal of nonputrescible waste at the landfill generated as a result of a contract entered into for demolition or site clearance prior to March 1, 1988, by the contractor depositing said waste, provided that the contractor has provided the city manager with a reasonable estimate of the volume of said waste and has filed a request for exemption under this section with the city manager within 30 days from the effective date of Ordinance No. 88-28. 
(Ord. No. 85-59, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 88-28, 3-15-88) 
Sec. 13-170.2. - Same—Duty of contractor to notify city manager when exempted work commences. 
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor depositing waste to notify the city manager when work on any contract exempted under section 13-170.1 begins and when work is completed. The city manager shall be authorized to credit the contractor for any tipping fees which normally would have been charged on any loads deposited under a contract exempt under section 13-170.1. 
(Ord. No. 85-59, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 13-171. - Billing and payments for solid waste collection and disposal services provided by city. 
(a)  All business, commercial, industrial and nonresidential institutional accounts electing to utilize city solid waste collection services pursuant to section 13-169, shall purchase from the treasury division of the department of finance decals, at the rate set forth in section 13-169, depending on container size, and such decals shall be placed upon the solid waste containers covered thereby. 
(b)  Billing and/or collecting for the tipping fees shall be provided by the department of public services. 
(Ord. No. 85-52, 5-21-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 2, 7-8-86) 
Sec. 13-172. - Administration of solid waste fee billing and collection system. 
The city manager and/or his duly authorized representative will be responsible for promulgating rules and regulations, including the sale of tickets or coupons for the tipping fee, for implementing sections 13-169, 13-170, and 13-171 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-52, 5-21-85) 
Sec. 13-172.1. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with sections 13-169 through 13-171 are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 85-52, 5-21-85) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEWERS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Article VIII, formerly entitled "Sewer and Water Systems," has been redesignated in order to facilitate codification of Ord. No. 83-101, enacted Dec. 27, 1983. The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 83-101 have been included herein as a new Div. 2, and former Div. 2, "Water," has been redesignated as Art. IX and former Art. IX, "Bait Beds," has been redesignated as Art. X. 
Note— See McDaniel vs. City of Columbus, 91 Ga. 462, 17 SE 1001, for holding the taking of property for sewer purposes is presumed to be for public use and will not be deemed confiscatory without a clear showing thereof. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-173. - Privy, water closet—Connection to city systems required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain, rent or lease to others, or permit to be used or maintained by others, any privy or water closet within the city where the premises on which such privy or water closet is located abut on that part of any street, alley or other place in which is located a sanitary sewer and a city water main or pipe, unless such privy or water closet is so connected with the water system of the city and the sewer as to flush the sewage from such privy or water closet into such sewer. 
(Ord. of 4-19-49, § 1) 
Sec. 13-174. - Same—Attachment to building required. 
Privies and water closets hereafter constructed in the city shall be located in or attached to the house or building by whose occupants the privy or water closet is used. 
(Ord. of 4-19-49, § 2) 
Sec. 13-175. - Same—Subsequent availability; time for connecting. 
Where sewers and the city water system are not available, but are hereafter made available, the provisions of section 13-173 hereof shall be complied with not later than the time allowed by the health officer in the official notice provided for in the following section hereof. 
(Ord. of 4-14-49, § 4; Ord. No. 68-226, § 1, 9-16-68) 
Sec. 13-176. - Same—Notice; time; evidence. 
The commissioner of health of Muscogee County, or his assistants, shall serve written notice on any person charged with a violation of this division, relating to connecting of privies and water closets to the city sewer and water systems, and to the buildings, such notice to state that there is a sewer in the street, alley or place upon which the premises abut, and that the water system of the city is available. 
In the case of a nonresident of Muscogee County, service by sending such notice by registered mail to his last known address shall be sufficient. 
In cases where the existing septic tank or other disposal systems being used are functioning in such manner as not to cause continuous, insanitary conditions or nuisances, such notice shall be served at least 60 days before the issuance of any summons for violation of section 13-173 hereof; provided, no prosecution shall fail for the want of such written notice where it appears from other evidence that the defendant had actual notice, at least 60 days prior to such summons, that there was a sewer in the street, alley, or place upon which the premises abut and that the water system of the city was available. 
In cases where septic tank or any other type systems being used have failed and evidence indicates that a continuous insanitary condition, nuisance, or health hazards exist, such notice shall allow only minimum reasonable time for connection to the sewer before the issuance of any summons for violations of section 13-173 hereof; provided further that such notice shall indicate the nature and extent of the existing condition caused by the failure of the sewage disposal system. 
(Ord. of 4-19-49, § 6; Ord. No. 68-226, §§ 2, 3, 9-16-68) 
Sec. 13-177. - Same—Multi-violations. 
Where a person constructs, uses, maintains, rents or leases to others, or permits to be used or maintained by others, one or more houses, buildings, or premises in violation of section 13-173 hereof, a separate violation shall exist as to each such house, building or premises. Each day's continuance of a violation of such section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-19-49, § 6) 
Sec. 13-178. - Wash-racks definition. 
The term "wash-rack", as used in this division, shall include any wash-rack, stand or place connected with or draining into a public sewer in the city, where automobiles or other vehicles are washed for compensation, or where such automobile or other vehicle wash-rack, stand or place is maintained or used in connection with any licensed automobile garage, automobile sales business, repair shop, filling station, or other licensed business. 
(Ord. of 3-27-28, § 1) 
Sec. 13-179. - Same—Construction requirements. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain or use any such wash-rack, as defined in the preceding section, unless the same complies with the following specifications: 
(1)  Each wash-rack or stand shall be equipped with a catch basin constructed of concrete, or of brick masonry plastered inside so as to be impervious to water; (2) such catch basin shall have a horizontal area of not less than nine square feet at any horizontal section below the surface of the water impounded therein; (3) the bottom of such catch basin shall be not less than three feet and six inches below the outlet opening, so as effectively to retain the mud and sand washed from automobiles or other vehicles; (4) the outlet of such catch basin shall be equipped either with a trap formed with a cast-iron sanitary tee, not less than four inches by four inches by four inches, with a cleanout plug in the end of the horizontal part of such tee, or with a trap formed by using a one-quarter bend, of not less than six inches diameter, recessed in the side wall of the catch basin. 
(Ord. of 3-27-28, § 2) 
Sec. 13-180. - Same—Removal of accumulated mud, sand, etc. 
All mud, sand or other material accumulating in such catch basin shall be removed therefrom before it fills to a point within six inches of the outlet opening at the bottom of the trap; and any person failing so to remove such mud, sand or other material, or who shall maintain or use a wash-rack in which the catch basin has been allowed to fill within six inches of the outlet opening at the bottom of the trap, shall be subject to the punishment hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 3-27-28, § 3) 
Sec. 13-181. - Tapping—Permissions required. 
No person shall tap any main sewer in the city or in any manner connect any waste or waterpipe, drain or sewer for any purpose without the consent of the city manager to tap or connect with such sewer. 
(Code 1914, § 709) 
Sec. 13-182. - Same—At owner's expense; competent work. 
No permission to tap or connect with any sewer shall be granted to any person unless the connection shall be made at the expense of the person obtaining such permission, and unless the work is done under the supervision of a competent mechanic and without expense to the city. 
(Code 1914, § 710) 
Secs. 13-183—13-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-74, §§ 1—12, adopted Aug. 17, 2004, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 13-201—13-331, pertained to similar subject matter. For complete list of derivations, see Code Comparative Table. 

SUBDIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 13-201. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this division is to regulate the use of public sewers and the installation and connection of building sewers; to establish standards of permissible liquid wastes acceptable into the sanitary sewer system of Columbus; to regulate industrial and commercial wastes discharged into the sanitary sewage system; to provide a system of surcharges for industrial waste contributors; and to provide penalties for violations and other purposes. This division shall apply to Columbus, Georgia, and to persons outside Columbus, Georgia, who are, by contract or agreement with the Columbus Water Works, Users of the Columbus Water Works Treatment system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the board of water commissioners shall implement, administer, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 1(1.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-202. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Approval authority. The director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Authorized representative of the industrial/commercial user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding 25 million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the Columbus Water Works. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Board. The Board of Water Commissioners, Columbus, Georgia, or its duly authorized and appointed representatives. 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical standards. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, et seq. 
City. Columbus, Georgia, a consolidated government. 
Classification code. The code given to distinguish food service establishments according to the service they provide. 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). A codification of the general and permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Columbus Water Works or water works. The water and sewer system of Columbus, Georgia whose governing body is the Columbus Board of Water Commissioners. 
Combined sewer. A sewer receiving both storm water and sanitary sewage. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or as to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Control authority. The Columbus Water Works whose governing body is the Columbus Board of Water Commissioners. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Domestic sewage. Water carrying wastes of human origin, as opposed to commercial or industrial activities. 
Environmental Protect Agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Environmental Protection Division or EPD. The Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source, if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). FOG is defined to include but not limited to the accumulation of oils, fats, cellulose, grease, and other substances that are composed primarily of fatty matter from animal and vegetable sources and from hydrocarbons of petroleum origin. 
Food service establishment. Any facility, excluding single-family dwellings, discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater into the sewer system. Any facility that in the opinion of the controlling authority would require a grease trap/interceptor installation by virtue of its operation. 
Grab sample. A sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease trap/interceptor. A device/pretreatment system utilized to effect separation of FOG in wastewater effluent to prevent excessive amounts of FOG discharges to the sanitary sewer system. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of non domestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307, (b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial/commercial user. A source of indirect discharge, which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations, issued pursuant to Section 402, of the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1342) 
Industrial/commercial wastes. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or commercial business, as distinct from domestic sewage. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Columbus Water Works NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substance Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The system used to categorize industrial users according to types of manufacturing and products produced. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of Industrial Users. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into the waters of the State of Georgia. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued to Section 402 or the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(a)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(b)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute obligation under this paragraph. 
Objectionable wastes. Any wastes that can harm or damage the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, health, or property, or constitute a nuisance. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the Columbus Water Works NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Permit. An official document, authorized by the Columbus Water Works, that list parameters and regulations that apply to those facilities specifically required to hold a permit. 
1.  Industrial permit is issued to those facilities by virtue of their manufacturing process that introduce pollutants through their discharge to the POTW. 
2.  Wastehaulers permit is issued to companies that transport wastewater to the head works of the POTW. 
3.  Commercial permit is issued to those facilities that are classified under the NAICS as non-manufacturing, that discharge waste to the POTW other than domestic. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollutant. Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, agriculture waste discharged into water and other compounds causing pollution as defined above. 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment work as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the Columbus Water Works. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this division, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside Columbus, Georgia, who are, by contract or agreement with the Columbus, Georgia, and/or the Columbus Water Works, users of the water works POTW. 
Public sewers. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by the Columbus Water Works and/or Columbus, Georgia. 
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed, intended and/or used to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Sara Title III. The Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act of 1986. Sara Title III establishes requirements for federal, state, local governments, and industry for emergency planning and reporting of hazardous and toxic chemicals. 
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the Columbus Water Works wastewater disposal system who: 
(i)  Has an average flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day of non-domestic sewage, or 
(ii)  Has a process wastewater flow greater than five percent of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Columbus Water Works wastewater treatment plant, or 
(iii)  Has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or state statute and EPD rules, or is subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or 
(iv)  Is found by the Columbus Water Works, EPD, or EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the public sewers, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the above mentioned criteria has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Columbus Water Works may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Slug discharge. Any discharge or water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer that 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
State. State of Georgia. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the office of Management and Budget 1972. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there from. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307 (a) of the Act or other Acts. 
Total toxic organics (TTO). The sum of the mass or concentration of specific organic compounds. 
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Columbus Water Works' POTW. 
Vice president. The vice president of the Columbus Water Works whose duties include environmental compliance management. 
Wastehauler. Any company or user that transports wastewater to the head works of the POTW. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Wastewater discharge permit. As set forth in section 13-283 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 1(1.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-203. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 1(1.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-204. - Effective dates. 
The effective date of this division shall be January 6, 1984. The effective date for approved revisions to this division shall be August 10, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 1(1.4), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-205—13-210. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 13-211. - Unsanitary, offensive deposits on property generally. 
It shall be a violation of this division for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within any area under the jurisdiction of Columbus, Georgia, and/or the Columbus Water Works, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 2(2.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-212. - Discharging waste to natural outlets. 
It shall be a violation of this division to discharge to any natural outlet or storm sewer system within any area in Columbus, Georgia and/or under the jurisdiction of the Columbus Water Works any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division, or a NPDES permit which has been issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 2(2.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-213. - Private sewage disposal. 
Except as hereinafter provided, construction or maintenance of any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 2(2.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-214. - Sewer connection required if available. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the jurisdiction of Columbus, Georgia, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required at their expense to install adequate and suitable toilet facilities therein for all occupants and/or users of said property and to connect such facilities with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within the required distance. In the event pumping is required for access to the public sewer, the pumping facility shall be installed and maintained by the owner. 
As for commercial and industrial users, the quality of the wastewaters must be analyzed and an assessment of those waters reviewed for proper disposal methods. Based on this assessment and where CWW's sewage conveyance system is available, those industrial and commercial users shall at their own expense and without regard to distance to the sanitary sewer system, install a sewage conveyance system to be connected to the Sanitary Sewer System of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 2(2.4), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-215—13-220. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 13-221. - Connection to private systems. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 13-214 above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this subdivision 3. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-222. - Refer application to health department. 
Application for permits to construct, repair, alter, enlarge, and/or use privies; privy vaults, cesspools, aeration systems and septic tanks shall be referred to the Muscogee County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-223. - Acceptable private sewage disposal. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Muscogee County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned at the end of such 90-day period. The private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt by the owner. Also, a property owner must repair and/or replace a private sewer connection within 90 days of notification by the Columbus Water Works that the repairs or a replacement is necessary. If the owner fails to complete the repairs/replacements within the 90 days, enforcement actions may include, but not limited to, disconnection of water and/or sewer services and/or fines as set forth in subdivision 10 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-224. - Private operation and funding. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Water Works, unless an agreement in writing has been made with the Columbus Water Works for such operation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-225. - Muscogee County Health Department. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Muscogee County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-226. - Hauled wastewater. 
All wastehaulers are required to obtain a permit, issued by CWW prior to any discharge to the POTW. 
(a)  Septic tank, grease-trap, and industrial waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the Columbus Water Works, and at such times as are established by the superintendent of the POTW. Such wastes shall not violate subdivision 5 of this division or any other requirements established by the Columbus Water Works. 
(b)  The Columbus Water Works shall require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The water works also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this division. The water works may also require haulers of permitted wastes to pay a fee for disposal at the pollution control facility. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the Columbus Water Works. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the water works. The water works may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Columbus Water Works may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking or manifest form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of the sources of the wastes, and volume and characteristics of the waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 3(3.6), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-227—13-230. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 13-231. - Application required. 
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, damage, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written authorization from the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-232. - Connection application. 
An owner or his agent shall make application for a sewer connection on a special form furnished by the Columbus Water Works. The application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information required by the Columbus Water Works. A connection fee of an amount set by the Columbus Water Board for a residential, commercial or industrial building sewer connection as the case may be, shall be paid to the Columbus Water Works at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-233. - Responsibility for cost. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Columbus Water Works from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-234. - Number of sewers required. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided by the owner for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-235. - Old building sewer acceptable. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when, on examination and test by the Columbus Water Works they meet all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-236. - Technical specifications. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the specifications of the Columbus Water Works for the design and installation of sewer mains in Muscogee County. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.6), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-237. - Sewer depth and pumping requirement. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor or concrete slab. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow, based on minimum hydraulic design, to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted up and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of and maintained by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.7), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-238. - Surface runoff prohibited. 
No person or property owner shall make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundations drains, areaway drains or other sources of unpolluted surface runoff or groundwater to a building/facility sewer or building which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. If a connection already exists, the person or property owner shall have, upon notification by the Columbus Water Works, 90 days to remove the illegal connection. 
Facilities such as, but not limited to carwashes and detail shops must have in place devices/structures to prevent surface runoff from entering the sanitary sewer. Approved devices/structures may include the following: roofs, structure sides, berms, and other applications approved by the Columbus Water Works. If the connection has been previously approved by the Columbus Water Works, a fee or surcharge may be imposed on the facility for the treatment of the surface runoff and to compensate for the extra hydraulic loading. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.8), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-239. - Connections to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the specifications for the design and installation of sewer mains in Muscogee County. The Columbus Water Works requires that all such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials, must be approved before installation by Columbus Water Works so as not to be in violation of the Codes and Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.9), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-240. - Inspection and supervision. 
The applicant for a commercial building sewer permit shall notify the Columbus Water Works before any backfill when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a representative of the water works. The applicant for a residential building sewer permit shall notify the building inspections and code enforcement department before any backfill when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a representative of building inspections and code enforcement department. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.10), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 18-10, § 1, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 13-241. - Safety. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights, or other means so as to protect the public from danger. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property, disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored by the building owner in a workman-like manner in accordance with the Codes and Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT). 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 4(4.11), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-242—13-250. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 5. - PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 13-251. - General discharge prohibitions. 
No user shall contribute or distribute, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that will cause interference or pass-through of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of a POTW in addition to all other provisions of the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (40 CFR Part 403) or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. A user may not contribute or distribute the following substances to any POTW. 
(A)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may become, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil or any wastestream which has a closed-cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 and which is a fire hazard to the system. 
(B)  Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(C)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. A user that discharges less than 50,000 gallons per day of process wastewater, may be allowed to discharge wastewater having a pH not less than 5.5 or greater than 11.0 as determined and approved by the Columbus Water Works. 
(D)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant Section 307 (a) of the Act, Sara Title III or TTO list. In the event of toxicity being found in the POTW, the Columbus Board of Water Commissioners Water Works may at its discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the Columbus Water Works NPDES permits. 
(E)  Any pollutants that are noxious, toxic or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or an acute hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(F)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(G)  Any substance, which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving stream water quality standards. 
(H)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Columbus Water Work's NPDES permit. 
(I)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in POTW treatment plant resulting in interference or heat in amounts along with corrosive characteristics of the wastewater, accelerate corrosion of the collection system piping or pump station structures and/or pump station equipment, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the public sewer which exceeds 65.5 degrees Celsius (150°F). Also prohibited is any wastewater with a temperature which will cause the temperature at the POTW influent to exceed 40°C (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(J)  Any slug discharge of wastes, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. 
(K)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(L)  Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(M)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Columbus Water Works in accordance with section [13-226] of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-252. - National pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N are hereby incorporated. Certain industrial users are now or shall become subject to these categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency, specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standard may also be subject to the limitations established in Column B of section 13-253 or by the State of Georgia. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources shall be subject to the requirements in section 13-294 of this division. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-253. - Limitations on wastewater strength and flow rate. 
No person or user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the concentration set forth in Column A below unless a special permit condition is issued with their wastewater discharge permit. Special permit conditions may be issued for the following reasons: 
(a)  The user is in compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, and the receiving plant's influent wastewater characteristic is within the guidelines established to protect the treatment plant operations and receiving stream water quality. 
(b)  In the case whereas the industrial user will have to construct or build a system to treat its effluent to within the permitted limits, a compliance schedule may be set forth for a particular industrial user to comply with permitted limits. 
(c)  For industrial users having discharges of less than 10,000 gallons per day, a mass limit may be applied based on the maximum acceptable concentration at a flow of 10,000 gallons per day. 
Tabulated in Column B are the maximum concentrations of the indicated constituents that are allowed in the waste stream at the influent of a treatment facility. Should these concentrations be exceeded, the discharge limits of the industrial users may be reduced below the limits in Column A. The industrial users may be required to reduce their concentrations to alternate limits set by the water works to ensure that the level in the POTW influent does not exceed the concentrations in Column B. 

 
The federal categorical pretreatment standards may establish limits for parameters not listed previously in this section, including specific organic substances. Any industry subject to these federal standards shall be required to meet the established limits through a permit issued by the water works. In addition, the water works may limit the discharge of other specific substances not listed above on a case-by-case basis, if the discharge of that substance is shown to interfere with the operation or performance of the receiving POTW or violates any receiving stream water quality standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-254. - Dilution prohibited. 
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Columbus Water Works or the state. The Columbus Water Works may impose mass limitations on an industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-255. - Accidental discharges. 
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the Columbus Water Works a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences as required by CFR 403. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division to other applicable law. Any user may be required by the Columbus Water Works to prepare and submit for approval a Spill Prevention/Contingency Plan. A Spill Prevention/Contingency Plan must address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals and a site map indicating the areas where these chemicals are stored; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the Columbus Water Works and any of the required government and local agencies of any accidental discharge or spill, required in the above paragraph of this section; 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or spill discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvent, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-256. - Pretreatment. 
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level in compliance with the provisions of the division shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Columbus Water Works for review, and shall be in compliance with the provisions of this division before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Columbus Water Works under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Columbus Water Works as in compliance with the provisions of this division prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.6), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-257. - Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and is readily available to the user: identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, and estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notifications under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 13-283(i) of this division. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under self-monitoring requirements of section 13-283(e) of this division. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Columbus Water Works, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. No hazardous waste may be discharged without prior approval by CWW. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.7), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-258. - Slug discharges. 
At least once every two years, the Columbus Water Works shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a slug control plan. For the purposes of this subsection, a slug discharge is any discharge of non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to a non-customary batch discharge. The water works may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan for the control of slug discharges. Alternatively, the Columbus Water Works may develop such a plan for any user. A slug discharge control plan shall address at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine and routine batch discharges, lockout procedures for all process tanks and storage tanks; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals in all process areas; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the Columbus Water Works of any accidental or slug discharges, as required in the above subsection of this section; 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from any slug discharges. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transferring of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 5(5.8), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-259, 13-260. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 6. - FEES 

Sec. 13-261. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the Columbus Water Works wastewater disposal system. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Columbus Water Works schedule of charges and fees. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 6(6.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-262. - Charges and fees. 
The Columbus Board of Water Commissioners may adopt charges and fees and from time to time modify, change, alter, increase or decrease said charges and fees for users of the Columbus Water Works POTW. Sewer service charges shall be prepared and rendered with the water bill. The board of water commissioners is also authorized to assess a separate fee for industrial users for costs incurred by the water works and related to the pretreatment requirements of this division. The monthly sewer service charge for users of public sewers including those facilities that are assessed a surcharge as described in section 13-263 who are supplied either wholly or in part with water from wells or sources of supply other than the water works shall be based on the measured waste flow using the rates in effect at the time. The owners of the premises or other interested parties shall install a flow measuring device on their waste discharge lines at no expense to the water works. The flow measuring device shall be of a type that shall perform within two percent of accuracy and shall be located so as to be readily accessible to representatives of the water works. The flow measuring devices shall be calibrated at least once per six months or whenever requested by the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 6(6.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-263. - Surcharges. 
All persons discharging high strength waste into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge set by the water works, in addition to any sewer service charge, if these wastes have a concentration of BOD in excess of 300 parts per million, suspended solids in excess of 300 parts per million, and/or oil and grease in excess of 100 parts per million, (note: oil and grease concentrations in excess of 200 parts per million is a violation of section 13-253 of this division). The surcharge rate is established by the Columbus Board of Water Commissioners based on the pounds of BOD, suspended solids, and oil and grease discharges in excess of the concentrations stated above. 
Said high strength waste (as defined above) of each user discharging same into the public sewers shall be subject to inspection periodically. A determination of character and concentration of said waste shall be made semiannually, or more frequently as determined by the Columbus Water Works. The concentration of BOD and suspended solids determined from these inspections shall be used to compute the monthly surcharges. The Columbus Water Works reserves the right to use COD concentrations in lieu of BOD concentrations, if the BOD concentrations of the effluent wastestream cannot be obtained due to interference from chemical constituents in the wastestream. Under these circumstances, COD concentrations may be used to determine the BOD concentrations. The laboratory methods used in the examination of the waste shall be those set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 6(6.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-264. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sands and any other harmful pollutants; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity specified by the Columbus Water Works Grease Trap Program, subdivision 7 of this division. Failure to comply may result in termination of water/wastewater services and/or fines as outlined in the subdivision 10 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 6(6.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-265. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the water works and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the water works for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern. The terms and condition of any such agreement may not, however result in a violation on any industrial pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 6(6.5), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-266—13-270. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 7. - COLUMBUS WATER WORKS GREASE/SAND TRAP PROGRAM 

Sec. 13-271. - Purpose. 
The intent of this program is to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations set forth in this ordinance and to provide specific standards for FOG traps/interceptors location, type, size, construction, installation, and maintenance, to prevent excessive fats, oils, and grease from entering the Columbus Water Works Sewer System. Food service establishments shall provide means of preventing FOG discharges into the sanitary sewer system by installing and maintaining traps/interceptors at the owner, leaseholder, or operator's expense using the guidelines set forth in this division. Failure to comply may result in penalties as set forth in subdivision 10 of this division. 
A list of the recommended ratings for commercial grease traps is presented in table, 1, section 13-277.3 of this division. An alternative to the proprietary grease trap is the pre-cast or poured in place concrete unit, usually located outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-272. - General requirements. 
The following design, administrative, operational, and other requirements are applicable to all food service establishments. Specific requirements for grease trap/interceptor construction for both new and existing food service establishments can be found in section 13-276 of this division. 
a.  All food service establishments shall have grease-handling systems approved by the Columbus Water Works. Establishments whose grease-handling facilities are not in accordance with this ordinance shall install approved devices within 90 days from initial notification date. 
b.  All food service establishment operations shall be subject to periodic review, evaluation, and inspection by CWW. 
c.  Violations of the FOG standards set forth in this division may result in enforcement actions as outlined in subdivision 9 of this division. 
d.  Food service establishments whose operations cause or allow excessive grease to discharge or accumulate in the sewer collection system may be liable for all cost associated to line blockages, line cleaning, line repair where needed, any stop-ups or overflows, and any damage to public or private property that is a direct result of grease accumulation related to the facility in violation. 
e.  All traps/interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with this division. 
f.  All food service establishments must complete a permit application for the discharge of waste from food preparation and food service industries into the Columbus Water Works Sewer System. 
g.  The following class codes will be used as a classification system to categorize the food service facilities. 

 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-273. - Inspection and sampling. 
CWW may inspect the facility of any user to determine compliance with this division. Facilities where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow CWW representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection. Unreasonable delays and/or denial of access shall be in direct violation of this division, and be subject to the penalties as set forth in subdivision 10 of this division. 
The applicant for the installation of an approved device shall notify the Columbus Water Works Environmental Compliance Department before any backfill, and when the device is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a representative of water works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-274. - Trap/interceptor maintenance. 
Maintenance and clean-out schedules shall be provided at the request of the Columbus Water Works. CWW will evaluate the efficiency of the device during inspections, and may require an increase or decrease in the frequency of clean-outs. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-274.1. - In-ground devices. 
Facilities with these devices shall adhere to a clean-out maintenance schedule as required by CWW. Schedules will be set using the following criteria: Business' operating hours, seating capacity, types of food service provided, size of device, and inspection results. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.41), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-274.2. - Under-sink/compartmental devices. 
Facilities that are approved for these type of devices shall be required to: 
A.  Clean-out on an as needed basis, minimum once every month. 
B.  Check devices at a minimum of once per week. 
C.  Maintain accurate records as defined in section 13-276 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.42), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-275. - Wastehaulers. 
Wastehaulers must obtain a permit from CWW. Wastehaulers will be issued a manifest to record clean-out information. A list of permitted wastehaulers will be maintained by the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-275.1. - Proper clean-out procedures. 
Proper clean-out procedures include, but are not limited to; total pump-out, dewatering, sludge/solids removal, and water replacement. Skimming is not an accepted method of cleaning out grease traps/interceptors. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.51), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-276. - Records and records retention. 
Records of FOG removal systems shall be maintained on forms supplied by CWW and available to CWW upon request. Records shall be retained for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.6), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-277. - Construction /sizing standards. 
[See the following.] 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.7), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-277.1. - Capacity. 
Traps should be sized for a minimum detention period of five minutes under peak flow conditions. Two options are shown below to size grease interceptors for restaurants and commercial kitchens. 
However, the minimum accepted size for a grease interceptor is 1,000 gallons. 

 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.71), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-277.2. - General installation requirements. 
1.  Grease traps shall be installed as close to the source of grease as possible, or so installed to allow the wastestream to cool considerably before entering the trap system. 
2.  The grease trap shall either be baffled to retain congealed grease on the surface of the liquid or contain two chambers for primary and secondary settling. 
3.  Influent shall enter the trap a minimum of six inches below the normal liquid level to keep the surface as still as possible. 
4.  Effluent shall be drawn from near the bottom of the trap at a minimum of 18 inches below the liquid level. 
5.  Inlet and outlet of trap shall be provided with cleanouts for unplugging both sewers and dip pipes. 
6.  Food waste disposers may not be connected through a grease interceptor. 
7.  A large manhole, removable slab, or other cover to suit traffic load shall be installed so that all chambers of the trap are readily accessible for complete cleaning of both floatable and settleable solids. 
8.  Top or cover shall be gas tight. 
9.  Grease collected from an interceptor shall not be introduced into any drainage piping, public or private sewer. 
10.  Sanitary/domestic waste shall not be allowed to flow in any interceptor/trap system. 
11.  All traps/interceptors shall have installed a means to prevent the introduction of materials into the pretreatment system such as paper, plastics, metals or other materials that which if introduced into the sanitary sewer system or directly into the headworks of the POTW, will cause obstruction, interference or damage to any of the conveyance systems or POTW treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.72), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-277.3. - New facilities. 
All food service establishments applying for water/sewer service shall be required to submit plans and or drawings outlining the plumbing layout and location of trap/interceptor installation. 
Facilities will be evaluated using the following criteria to determine trap size: 
1.  Class code. 
2.  Hours of operation. 
3.  Seating capacity. 
In-ground devices. Sizes shall be determined using the criteria listed above, and capacity standards as listed in section 13-277.1 of this division. 
Compartmental/under-sink devices. May be installed in instances where the type of food service presents little or no possibility of the discharge of fats, oils, and grease. 
All devices must have approval prior to construction or installation by CWW, and adhere to any local and/or state plumbing codes that apply. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.73), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-277.4. - Existing facilities. 
All existing facilities upon notification, shall install an approved grease handling device within 90 days of such notification. 
In situations in which in-ground devices are not feasible to install, facilities will be required to install an approved compartmental device. This variance must be approved by CWW prior to installation. 
When an existing facilities grease handling device is determined to be in non-compliance the responsible person(s) will be notified in writing, of the required improvements which shall be made within 90 days of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.74), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-278. - FOG enforcement. 
The control authority (CWW), will conduct random inspections to insure that proper maintenance and cleanout schedules are being followed. 
Cleanout schedules will be set by CWW using the variables as outlined in section 13-274 of this division. Cleanout frequency may increase or decrease depending on the efficiency (prevention of grease entering the sewer system) of the device installed. Failure to comply with these schedules may subject the user/owner to the penalties as outlined in subdivision 10. 
Any facility that is found to be responsible for a sewer line blockage and/or sanitary sewer overflow will be liable for any expenses incurred from the cleanup or unstopping of the sewer line/system. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.8), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-279. - Detail shops/carwashes. 
Facilities that are required by the Columbus Consolidated Government to discharge their wastestream into the Columbus Water Works Sanitary Sewer shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  An approved sandtrap/interceptor must be installed and maintained for the prevention of sand, oil, and grease from entering the sewer system. 
2.  Sandtrap/interceptors shall be covered with an approved roof and devices in place to prevent storm water run-off from entering the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 7(7.9), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-280. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 13-281. - Permit application. 
Significant industrial users shall discharge wastewater only in accordance with the conditions of their wastewater discharge permit. All significant industrial users shall apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit in the manner hereinafter set forth. Permit application forms will be sent to affected industrial users by the Columbus Water Works following promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the Columbus Water Works that a permit be issued. A permit application shall be submitted by the user, accompanied by a fee set by the Columbus Water Works, within 180 days after promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the Columbus Water Works that a permit be issued. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-282. - Incomplete application. 
The Columbus Water Works will act only on complete applications. Persons who have filed incomplete application will be notified by the Columbus Water Works that the application is deficient and the nature of such deficiency and will be given 30 days to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within 30 days or within such extended period as allowed by the Columbus Water Works, the application will be denied and the applicant notified in writing of such action. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-283. - Permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of the division and all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations. Permits may contain the following: 
(a)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer; 
(b)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(c)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(d)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(e)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state or local law; 
(f)  Compliance schedules; 
(g)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(h)  Requirements for retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge; 
(i)  Requirements for notification of the Columbus Water Works of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(j)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
(k)  Requirements for the installation of facilities or procedures to prevent and control accidental discharge or spills at the user's premises; 
(l)  Requirement of a spill prevention/contingency plan; 
(m)  Requirements for notification of any by-passes around pretreatment systems; 
(n)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Columbus Water Works to ensure compliance with this division; 
(o)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(p)  Statement of permit duration as specified in section 13-284 of this division; 
(q)  Statement of non-transferability as specified in section 13-285 of this division; 
Prior to issuing a discharge permit, a draft permit will be sent to the user (certified mail-return receipt requested) which will show the conditions and discharge limitations. The user will be allowed 30 days to show cause why the conditions of this permit should not be required. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-284. - Permit duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit re-issuance at least 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit shall expressly provide that they are subject to modifications, new conditions, and changes by the Columbus Water Board during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subdivision 5 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The Columbus Water Works reserves the right to extend or change a permit expiration date for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Unanticipated changes in the application or permitting processes; 
(b)  Unanticipated changes to any federal rule or regulation concerning industrial pretreatment. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-285. - Permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new or different owner, new or different user, different premises, or a new, different, or changed operation without the approval of the Columbus Water Works. Any succeeding owner or user, upon request, shall be provided with a copy of the existing permit by the existing owner. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-286. - Monitoring facilities. 
The Columbus Water Works may require to be provided and operated at an industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, testing, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility shall normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Columbus Water Works, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the user, permit the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The facility, sampling, testing, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling, testing, and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Columbus Water Board requirements, this division and all applicable local building codes, construction standards and specifications. The facility shall be completed within 90 days following written notification of requirement by the Columbus Water Board. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.6), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-287. - Inspection and sampling. 
The Columbus Water Works shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purposes of this division are being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Columbus Water Works and its representatives, the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The Columbus Water Works shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, testing, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force, which require proper clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that personnel from the Columbus Water Works, EPD, or EPA will be permitted to perform their specific responsibilities and to exercise the rights and authorities herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.7), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-288. - Wastewater survey. 
Any commercial or industrial user may be required to complete a wastewater survey questionnaire as requested by the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.8), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-289. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user and/or its business contained in reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and/or inspections shall be available to the public or other government entities or agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and demonstrates the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as a secret, right of privacy or trade secret of the user or that it would substantially injure or damage the user. 
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose rights of privacy, trade secrets, secret processes or contain substantially injuring or damaging information shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon request to governmental entities and agencies for uses related to this division, the Water Works' National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, or pretreatment program; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by or any state entities or agency in enforcement proceedings or judicial review involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential; information entitled to any protection from disclosure. Information accepted by the Columbus Water Works as confidential, as provided above shall not be transmitted to the general public by the Columbus Water Works until and unless a ten-day advance written notification is given to the User by the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.9), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-290. - Signatory requirements. 
All wastewater permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user, as defined in section 13-202 and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.10), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-291. - Public notification of violations. 
The Columbus Water Works shall at a minimum, annually publish in the Columbus newspaper a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. For purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the monthly average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the monthly average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(c)  Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or long-term average) that an IU/Commercial user causes alone or in conjunction with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the board exercising its emergency authority under section 13-311; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance milestone contained in a user's wastewater permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(h)  Any other violation or group of violations which Columbus Water Works determines will adversely affect the operation of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.11), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-292. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a categorical determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Columbus Water Works a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the water works a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity or pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operation. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
(b)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Columbus Water Works, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where require shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13-263 of this division. 
(c)  Sampling must be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7(C)(iv). 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13-290 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.12), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-293. - Compliance schedule. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 13-292(7) of this division: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the Columbus Water Works no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule, and; 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.13), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-294. - Compliance with categorical standards. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater to the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Columbus Water Works a report containing the information described in section 13-292 of this division. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit or production (or other measure or operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13-290 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.14), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-295. - Compliance reports (self-monitoring). 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Columbus Water Works, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13-290 of this division. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Columbus Water Works, using the procedures prescribed in section 13-298 of this division, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.15), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-296. - Changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the Columbus Water Works of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume or its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(a)  The Columbus Water Works may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 13-281 of this division. 
(b)  The Water Works may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 13-284 of this division or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 13-284 of this division in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(c)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.16), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-297. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Columbus Water Works within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Columbus Water Works within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if: 
(a)  The Columbus Water Works performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or 
(b)  The Columbus Water Works performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.17), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-298. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Columbus Water Works may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this provides a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.18), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-299. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses not be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.19), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-300. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records if information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user is independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Columbus Water Works, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the water works. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 8(8.20), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-301—13-309. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 13-310. - Administration by water works. 
The Columbus Water Works reserves the right to administer any of, but not limited to, the following enforcement actions. In addition to the following enforcement actions, the Columbus Water Works administers a pretreatment enforcement response plan that specifies a step by step enforcement action program. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9, 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-311. - Emergency termination of service. 
In the event of an actual or threatened discharge to the POTW of any pollutant which presents an imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of persons, or danger of interference with the POTW, the Columbus Water Works shall immediately notify the industrial user or other person causing or responsible for the condition and request their assistance in abating the same. Columbus Water Works may temporarily terminate service of such user or users to abate the condition when such action is reasonably necessary. Such service shall be restored by the Columbus Water Works as soon as the emergency situation has been abated or corrected. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-312. - Notification of violation. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served by the Columbus Water Works with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing reasonable time limit in days, weeks or months, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The user shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease and/or remedy all violations. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-313. - Administrative orders. 
Administrative orders (AOs) are enforcement documents that direct non-domestic users to undertake or to cease specified activities. The terms of AOs may or may not be negotiated with non-domestic users. AOs are used as the first formal response to significant noncompliance. Four common types of AOs are: 
(a)  Consent agreements. A negotiated agreement with the IU in which both parties agree to actions to be taken to return to compliance. 
(b)  Cease and desist orders. A directive to an IU to discontinue an action that is resulting in noncompliance. 
(c)  Show cause orders. Formal meeting requiring the IU to appear and demonstrate why the water works should not take a proposed enforcement action against it. The meeting may also serve as a forum to discuss corrective actions and compliance schedules. 
(d)  Compliance orders (compliance schedules). A time schedule of activities to be completed to return an IU to compliance. 
Consent agreements are the first formal response to significant noncompliance in which terms are negotiated with the user. If the consent agreement fails to be effective, other AOs without user negotiation will be used. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.3), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-314. - Revocation of permit. 
Any user who violates the following conditions of this division and/or applicable state and federal laws and/or regulations, is subject to revocation of his permit in accordance with the procedures of subdivision 9 of this division: 
(a)  Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(b)  Failure of the user to report material changes in his operation, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(c)  Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, testing or monitoring; or, 
(d)  Violation of conditions of his permit in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.4), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-315. - Show cause hearing. 
The Columbus Water Board may issue a notice directing a user to appear before the board at a specified date and time to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken in response to a violation of this division, other applicable law or regulation, or conditions in the user's wastewater discharge permit. 
The board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or it may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the board to conduct the hearing and transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, with recommendations, to the board for action thereon. 
After the board has reviewed the evidence, it may take action for violations as authorized under subdivision 10 of the division. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.5), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-316. - Injunctive relief. 
Columbus, Georgia may file in superior court of Muscogee County, Georgia, or any other appropriate forum a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, and/or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this division or other applicable law or regulation. Such a suit may include any and all damages suffered by Columbus, Georgia, or the board as a result of any action, omissions, or inaction of any user or other person who causes or permits damage to occur to the POTW, or for any other expense, cost, loss or damage of any kind or nature suffered by Columbus, Georgia, or any branch, department or agency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.6), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-317. - Damaging facilities. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, remove, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of Columbus Water Works or the sewerage work of Columbus, Georgia. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.7), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-318. - Affirmative defense for upsets. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, an upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and, 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the Columbus Water Works within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, written submission must be provided within five days): 
(A)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(B)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(C)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance. 
(D)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(E)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(F)  User shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.8), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-319. - Affirmative defense for prohibited discharge. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subdivision 5 of this division if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(a)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass though or interference; or 
(b)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Columbus Water Works was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.9), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-320. - Affirmative defense for bypasses. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section; 
(1)  A bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a users treatment facility. 
(2)  A severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which cause them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Columbus Water Works, at least ten days before the date of the bypasses, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the Columbus Water Works of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be submitted within five business days of the bypass as required per CFR 403. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The water works may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the Columbus Water Works may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(A)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(B)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and, 
(C)  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The Columbus Water Works may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the water works determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. All decisions on validity of affirmative defenses will be made by the board of water commissioners or its designee and such decisions will be final. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 9(9.10), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-321—13-330. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 10. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 13-331. - Actions by the water works. 
Should water or wastes be discharged to the POTW in violation of any provisions of this division, the board may after notifying the offender and providing a hearing before the board: 
(1)  Terminate water service and/or the discharge of water and wastes by the violator into the POTW; 
(2)  Require pretreatment into a condition as authorized and/or required by this division, or any water or waters into the POTW; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and flow rates of water or wastes entering the POTW as authorized and/or required by this division; 
(4)  Require payment by the violator to cover the added capital and operating costs, not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, of handling and treating otherwise prohibited wastes, which can be documented as reasonable charges for the materials, supplies, labor and other costs actually required. 
(5)  Revoke the users permit; 
(6)  Any person failing to pay any sewer charges authorized by this division shall be subject to termination of his water and/or sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 10(10.1), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-332. - Fines: civil and criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction in the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia, be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment at the discretion of the recorder. 
Further, any industrial user who violates any provisions of subdivisions 5 through 8 of this division, shall be subject to a civil or criminal action to be brought by the Columbus Water Works, and if found to be in violation, civil or criminal penalties up to at least $1,000.00 per violation per day may be awarded. 40 CFR 403.8(f). 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 10(10.2), 8-17-04) 
Sec. 13-333. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, omission or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division or reports of any such monitoring device or method may be subject to a fine or imprisonment under applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 10(10.3), 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-334—13-340. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION 11. - POWER OF WATER BOARD 

Sec. 13-341. - Powers and authority. 
The board of water commissioners, a subordinate branch of the government of Columbus, Georgia, and its designees, are hereby granted all of the authority of Columbus, Georgia, a consolidated government, to deal with, exercise or apply all of the powers and authority of Columbus, Georgia, with respect to the subject matter of this division; all of the authority and powers contained in the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as presently amended and/or Federal law on the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
The board of water commissioners, and its designees, are hereby authorized to develop formulas and promulgate regulations to provide, inter alia for the sharing or paying of costs according to benefit or otherwise, or facilities, connections, service charges, discharge fees, pretreatment charges, retainers, interceptors, permit fees, user charges and fees, sampling, testing, measuring and monitoring fees. 
(Ord. No. 04-74, § 12, 8-17-04) 
Secs. 13-342—13-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WATER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— In order to facilitate codification of Ord. No. 83-101, former Art. IX, §§ 13-185—13-189, has been redesignated as Art. X, §§ 13-501—13-505, and former Art. VIII, Div. 2, §§ 13-182.1, 13-183 and 13-184, has been redesignated as Art. IX, §§ 13-351—13-353. The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 83-101 were then codified as a new Art. VIII, Div. 2. 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Mercantile Trust and Deposit Company of Baltimore, 218 U. S. 645, 31 S. Ct. 105, for holding that city may rescind contract to furnish water where the person furnishing such water is guilty of a breach of such contract to furnish water. 

Sec. 13-351. - Fluoridation of public water system. 
The application of fluorides to the public water system of Columbus, Georgia, is hereby approved and the Columbus Water Board of Commissioners is hereby directed to adopt a system of applying fluorides to the public water system of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 72-11, § 2, 1-25-72) 
Sec. 13-352. - Open wells, cisterns; forbidden where city water system available. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, owning or renting any residence or building, to have, keep, use or maintain on the premises, where same is located, any well or open cistern, which is used, or can be used for the purpose of supplying drinking water to the occupants of such residence or building, or to others, where such premises abut upon a street wherein is located pipes and mains for a public water supply which can, by proper connection, be made available to supply such residence or building with water for drinking purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-6-18, § 1) 
Sec. 13-353. - Injury to equipment of water works. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons, without authority, to in any manner interfere with, injure or remove any of the fixtures or appurtenances of hydrants, pipes or appendages thereto, belonging to the system of water works in the city, or without authority, to use the water, or suffer others to use it, or wantonly or negligently waste the water, or permit others to waste the same, or use any of the hydrants or fixtures for hitching posts. The police shall be diligent and report every infraction of this section. 
(Code 1914, § 773) 
Secs. 13-354—13-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BAIT BEDS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— In order to facilitate codification of Ord. No. 83-101, former Art. IX, §§ 13-185—13-189, has been redesignated as Art. X, §§ 13-501—13-505, and former Art. VIII, Div. 2, has been redesignated as Art. IX. The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 83-101 were then codified as a new Art. VIII, Div. 2. 

Sec. 13-501. - Proximity to residences, complaint necessary for enforcement. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter set forth, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any bait bed for the keeping or propagation of fishing worms at any place in the city which is within a radius of 150 feet of the nearest part of any dwelling house occupied by a person other than the owner or keeper of such bait bed. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable where no complaint is hereafter made to the city commission, or to the police department, by an occupant of a dwelling house within such prohibited distance. 
(Ord. of 2-27-51, § 1) 
Sec. 13-502. - Proximity to food establishments. 
No bait bed for the keeping or propagation of fishing worms shall, under any circumstances, be maintained within 250 feet of any building or grounds where food is served to the public for human consumption. 
(Ord. of 2-27-51, § 2) 
Sec. 13-503. - Maximum area; not allowed when a nuisance. 
Bait beds not exceeding an aggregate of ten square feet in area, where worms are kept or propagated for other than commercial purposes, and which comply with the following provisions of this article, may be maintained within the city, unless it be made to appear upon trial that their maintenance constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-27-51, § 3) 
Sec. 13-504. - Protection from insects. 
In all cases, whether or not bait beds are maintained for commercial or other purposes, and whether or not complaint is made or nuisance alleged, all bait beds shall be kept covered by wire screening containing not less than 16 mesh to each linear inch, in order to keep out flies and other insects. 
(Ord. of 2-27-51, § 4) 
Sec. 13-505. - Effect on other Code provisions. 
Nothing herein is intended to repeal or to limit the force of any other provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city prohibiting public or private nuisances. 
(Ord. of 2-27-51, § 5) 
Secs. 13-506—13-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PHOSPHATE-FREE HOUSEHOLD LAUNDRY DETERGENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-78, adopted July 25, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—6 as Art. XI, §§ 13-511—13-515, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 13-511. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than five-tenths percent phosphorus by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorous in wastewater discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, and to prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 7-25-89) 
Sec. 13-512. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Phosphorous means elemental phosphorous. 
(Ord. No. 89-78, § 2, 7-25-89) 
Sec. 13-513. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than five-tenths percent phosphorous by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89-78, § 3, 7-25-89) 
Sec. 13-514. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to penalty as provided by section 1-8 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) above, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-78, §§ 4, 5, 7-25-89) 
Sec. 13-515. - Right to damages or relief. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right to any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. No. 89-78, § 6, 7-25-89) 
Secs. 13-516—13-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - FOOD SERVICE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 13-521. - State rules and regulations for food service adopted by reference. 
The Rules and Regulations of State of Georgia for Food Services, at 290-5-14.01 et seq. in the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, as compiled by the secretary of state, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same is attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 13-522. - Amendments. 
(a)  290-5-14-.02(1)(a) of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia for Food Services shall be amended by adding at the end of the first sentence the following: 
(i)  Before a food service permit is granted pursuant to this chapter by the health authority, each applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount established as shown on the attached fee table that is incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same attached hereto. A copy of said fee table is on file in the office of the clerk of said Council of Columbus. 
(ii)  Food service permits granted by the health authority under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year. Permit holders do not have an automatic right to renewal and must be in satisfactory compliance with the provisions of the rules of this chapter for the granting of permits. Permit renewal fee(s) must be received by the health authority within 30 days of the expiration of the permit. 
(iii)  Permit holders who fail to satisfy compliance with the rules of this chapter at the time of renewal or fail to submit the permit renewal fee as required, are subject to administrative closure of the establishment. 
(b)  290-5-14-.11(6) shall be deleted in its entirety and there substituted a new section so numbered as stated to read as follows: 
(c)  290-5-14-.11(6) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. Citations for such violations shall be heard in the environmental court division of recorders court. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, §§ 2, 3, 6-17-03) 
Secs. 13-523—13-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TOURIST ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 13-531. - State rules and regulations for tourist accommodations adopted by reference. 
The Rules and Regulations of State of Georgia for Tourist Accommodations, at 290-5-18 et seq. in the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, as compiled by the secretary of state are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same is attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, § 1, 6-8-04) 
Sec. 13-532. - Amendments. 
(a)  290-5-18-.02(1) of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia for Tourist Accommodations shall be amended by adding the following after subparagraph (h): 
(i)  Before a tourist accommodation permit is granted pursuant to this chapter by the health authority, each applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount established as shown on the attached fee table that is incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same attached hereto. A copy of said fee table is on file in the office of the clerk of said Council of Columbus. 
(j)  Tourist accommodation permits granted by the health authority under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year. Permit holders do not have an automatic right to renewal and must be in satisfactory compliance with the provisions of the rules of this chapter for the granting of permits. Permit renewal fee(s) must be received by the health authority within 30 days of the expiration of the permit. 
(k)  Permit holders who fail to satisfy compliance with the rules of this chapter at the time of renewal or fail to submit the permit renewal fee as required, are subject to administrative closure of the establishment. 
(b)  290-5-18-.18 shall be deleted in its entirety and there substituted a new section so numbered as stated to read as follows: 
290-5-18-.18 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. Citations for such violations shall be heard in the environmental court division of recorders court. 
(Ord. No. 04-42, §§ 2, 3, 6-8-04) 
Secs. 13-533—13-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TATTOO STUDIOS AND TATTOO ARTISTS 

Sec. 13-541. - State rules and regulations for tattoo studios and tattoo artists adopted by reference. 
The Rules and Regulations for Tattoo Studios and Tattoo Artists as adopted by the Columbus Board of Health, and further identified as the proposed Rules and Regulations at Chapter 290-31-40 et seq. are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same is attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 04-43, § 1, 6-8-04) 
Sec. 13-542. - Amendments. 
(a)  290-31-40.18 of said Rules and Regulations adopted by the Columbus Board of Health shall be amended by adding the following at the end: 
(7)  Before a tattoo studio and tattoo artist permit is granted pursuant to this chapter by the health authority, each applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount established as shown on the attached fee table that is incorporated herein by reference and a copy of the same attached hereto. A copy of said fee table is on file in the office of the clerk of said Council of Columbus. 
(8)  Tattoo studio and tattoo artist permits granted by the health authority under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year. Permit holders do not have an automatic right to renewal and must be in satisfactory compliance with the provisions of the rules of this chapter for the granting of permits. Permit renewal fee(s) must be received by the health authority within 30 days of the expiration of the permit. 
(9)  Permit holders who fail to satisfy compliance with the rules of this chapter at the time of renewal or fail to submit the permit renewal fee as required, are subject to administrative closure of the establishment. 
(b)  290-31-40-.22 of said Rules and Regulations shall be deleted in its entirety and there substituted a new section so numbered as stated to read as follows: 
290-31-40-.22 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. Citations for such violations shall be heard in the environmental court division of recorders court. 
(Ord. No. 04-43, §§ 2, 3, 6-8-04) 
Chapter 13A - MASSAGE THERAPISTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1998, repealed former Ch. 13A in its entirety and enacted provisions as a new Ch. 13A to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13A, §§ 13A-1—13A-12, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following ordinances: 

 

Sec. 13A-1. - Definition. 
A person who applies manual or mechanical massage or acupressure or any similar treatment to the human trunk or limbs shall be deemed within the terms of this chapter as massage therapist engaged in massage therapy. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-2. - License required, application; information required. 
(a)  Any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, or any other form of business organization desiring to engage in the business, trade, or profession of massage therapy shall before engaging in such business, trade, or profession, file an application for a license addressed to the finance director. Such application shall be on a form approved by the finance director and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Name and address of any person, firm, corporation, or partnership having previously employed the applicant for the previous two years; 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the address or addresses of such corporation or partnership as well as the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation and partners of the partnership; 
(4)  A copy of certification of the applicant's completion of a course of study which consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, or hygiene of not less than 500 hours at a school accredited by one of the following organizations or its successors: 
(i)  Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges of Technology (ACCSCT). 
(ii)  Accrediting Council for Continuing Education & Training (ACCET). 
(iii)  Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA). 
(iv)  Integrative Massage & Somatic Therapies Accreditation (IMSTAC). 
Or, alternatively a copy of certification issued by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, a copy of either of these certifications awarded to the employee or agent engaged in the practice of massage therapy must be provided with the application. 
(5)  Any other information which is determined to be required in order to assess the eligibility of the applicant for licensure as a massage therapist practitioner. 
(b)  The finance department shall forward the application to the Columbus Police Department for a criminal record check to determine if applicant qualifies pursuant to the provisions of 13A-6(3) and 13A-6(4). 
(c)  Within five days of receipt the chief of police shall provide the finance department with pertinent criminal records of the applicant or a statement certifying that the applicant has no criminal record which would constitute a reason for denial of the application. 
(d)  The finance department will inform the applicant of either approval or denial of application within 15 working days of the original filing date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 03-18, § 1, 3-25-03) 
Sec. 13A-3. - Issuance of license. 
If the application is submitted in proper form and the applicant is found to be eligible for licensure pursuant to section 13A-6, the occupation tax section of the department of finance shall issue a business license to such applicant as provided in section 19-36. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-4. - Denial of application; notice and right of appeal. 
If an applicant is found to be ineligible for licensure pursuant to section 13A-6, the occupation tax section of the finance department shall recommend to the finance director that the application be denied. Upon receipt of such a recommendation the finance director shall review the application and any other information which may be provided by the occupation tax section. If the finance director determines that the applicant is ineligible for licensure pursuant to section 13A-6 the application shall be denied and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such action. 
(1)  Any applicant whose application for a massage therapy license is denied may appeal the denial to the Columbus council at any time within 30 days after the date of the denial. An applicant wishing to appeal a denial pursuant to this section shall request an appeal hearing in writing to the clerk of council, stating the reasons the denial should not have been issued. 
(2)  Upon receipt of such a request the clerk of council shall schedule an appeal hearing before council and shall deliver written notification to the applicant and the finance director concerning the time the appeal will be heard by the council. 
(3)  At the time scheduled by the clerk of council the council shall consider the appeal of the applicant, but no license shall be approved by council unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of a majority of the members of council that there has been a mistake of fact concerning the applicant's ability to satisfy the criteria for licensure specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-5. - Revocation of license. 
The license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation for any of the reasons specified in section 13A-6. Whenever in the opinion of the chief of police or the finance director there is cause to revoke such license, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The chief of police or finance director shall notify the clerk of council in writing of the recommendation to seek revocation of the license and the reasons therefor. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall give written notice to the holder of the license, the chief of police and the finance director at least two weeks in advance that the council will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked. This notice shall include date and time of the hearing and the specific reasons for which this recommendation to council will be made. 
(3)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia shall hear the recommendation for revocation at one of its regular meetings at which time the holder of the license and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No license shall be revoked until a majority of the council so decides at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-6. - Grounds for revocation or denial of license. 
Occurrence of any of the following shall be considered grounds for denial of an application or revocation of such licenses: 
(1)  Failure of the license holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license under this chapter. 
(2)  Operation of the business of a massage therapist under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner licensed under this chapter. 
(3)  Conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond for any state or federal felony by the applicant at any time within five years preceding the date of application, or by a license holder at any time. 
(4)  Conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond for a state or federal misdemeanor violation of any laws relating to prostitution, public indecency, masturbation for hire, pimping, pandering, solicitation of sodomy, distributing obscene materials or the giving of massages in places used for lewdness or prostitution by the applicant at any time within two years preceding the date of application, or by a license holder at any time. 
(5)  The inclusion of materially false information or the attempt by an applicant or license holder to deliberately falsify information contained in an application or license renewal request. 
(6)  Violations by the license holder of any state law prohibiting false or fraudulent statements in advertising or the unauthorized practice by the license holder of any other profession licensed by the state. 
(7)  Repeated violations of city ordinances by the license holder as set forth in section 19-20 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-7. - Records required to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of any person so granted a license to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at said establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the employee of the establishment administering said treatment. Said records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the police department or finance department of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-8. - Practitioner certificate required, application; information required. 
(a)  Any man or woman desiring to engage in the practice of massage therapist, whether for a business licensed as a massage therapy business as provided herein or for any other business shall, before engaging in such practice, file an application for a massage therapist practitioner's certificate addressed to the director of finance of the city. Such application shall be on a form approved by the finance director and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of practitioner; 
(2)  Name and address of any person, firm, corporation, or partnership having previously employed the practitioner for the previous two years; 
(3)  A copy of certification of the applicant's (practitioner) completion of a course of study which consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, or hygiene of not less than 500 hours at a school accredited by one of the following organizations or its successors: 
(i)  Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges of Technology (ACCSCT). 
(ii)  Accrediting Council for Continuing Education & Training (ACCET). 
(iii)  Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA). 
(iv)  Integrative Massage & Somatic Therapies Accreditation (IMSTAC). 
Or, alternatively a copy of certification issued by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, a copy of either of these certifications awarded to the employee or agent engaged in the practice of massage therapy must be provided with the application. 
(4)  Any other information which is determined to be required in order to assess the eligibility of the applicant for certification as a massage therapist practitioner. 
(b)  The finance department shall forward the application to the Columbus Police Department for a criminal record check to determine if the practitioner qualifies under the provisions of section 13A-11(3) and section 13A-11(4). 
(c)  Within five days of receipt the chief of police shall provide the finance department with pertinent criminal records of the applicant or a statement certifying that the applicant has no criminal record which would constitute a reason for denial of the application. 
(d)  The finance department will inform the applicant of either approval or denial of application within 15 working days of the original filing date of the application. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of each person who receives a massage therapy practitioner's certificate to file with the finance department changes of the practitioner's home address, home telephone number, and location of practice. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 03-18, § 2, 3-25-03) 
Sec. 13A-9. - Issuance of certificate; certificate displayed. 
If the application is submitted in proper form and can be approved, then the occupation tax section of the department of finance is authorized to issue a certificate to such practitioner. The certificate is to be prominently displayed where the massage therapist practices and will be subject to inspection by any member of the finance department, special enforcement division, or Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-10. - Revocation of certificate; procedures. 
The certificate granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation for cause. Whenever, in the opinion of the chief of police or finance director, there is cause to revoke the certificate, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  Written notice shall be given to the practitioner at least two weeks in advance that the Council of Columbus, Georgia will hear a recommendation that the certificate be revoked and this notice shall include the specific ground or grounds in which this recommendation to council will be made. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall so notify in writing the practitioner, the director of finance, and the chief of police as to the time a recommendation for revocation will be heard by the council. 
(3)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia shall hear a recommendation for revocation at one of its regular meetings at which time the practitioner and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No certificate shall be revoked until a majority of the council so decides at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-11. - Grounds for revocation or denial of certificate. 
Occurrence of any of the following shall be considered grounds for revocation or denial of a massage therapy practitioner certificate: 
(1)  Failure of the practitioner to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the certificate under this chapter. 
(2)  The practitioner is engaged in the business of a massage therapist under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner who possesses a valid certificate under this chapter. 
(3)  Conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeited bond by the applicant for any state or federal felony within five years prior to the date of application or at any time after the date of application; conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeited bond by the applicant for a state or federal misdemeanor violation of any laws relating to prostitution of public indecency, masturbation for hire, pimping, pandering, solicitation of sodomy, distributing obscene materials or the giving of massages in places used for lewdness or prostitution as prescribed by state law within two years prior to the date of application or at any time after the date of application. 
(4)  The original application for massage therapy practitioner certificate, contains materially false information or the practitioner has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(5)  Violations by the practitioner of any state law prohibiting false or fraudulent statements in advertising or the unauthorized practice of any other profession licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-12. - Records required to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of any practitioner granted a massage therapy practitioner's certificate to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment, the date of service, and the type of treatment administered. Said records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the police department or finance department of the City Of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 13A-13. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-8 as codified in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 98-87, § 1, 9-8-98) 
Chapter 13B - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-210, adopted Aug. 17, 1971, was enacted as adding Ch. 13D to this Code. However, to preserve the alphabetical format of chapter titles, the ordinance was codified as Ch. 13B, Ch. 13B was renumbered as Ch. 13C, and Ch. 13C was renumbered as Ch. 13D. The ordinance is set out as enacted, including the catchlines and numbering system; however, the section numbers were prefixed with the chapter number, and the word "ordinance" was changed to "chapter" by the editors, to preserve established Code format. 
Cross reference— Floodplain requirements for manufactured home parks, Ch. 11A, mobile home registration and permits for location, Ch. 13C; zoning, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 13B-101. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Mobile Home Park, Mobile Home Subdivision and Travel Trailer Court Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(101), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 79-150, § 1, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-102. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of Columbus, Georgia, by regulating the occupancy and maintenance of mobile homes, mobile home parks, travel trailers and travel trailer courts. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(102), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-103. - Function. 
This chapter establishes minimum standards for mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and travel trailer courts not existing on December 28, 1979. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(103), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 79-150, § 2, 12-27-79) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 13B-201. - General. 
Unless the context of this chapter requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and administration of the chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include the word "building"; the word "used" shall include "arranged", "designed", "constructed", "altered", "converted", "rented", "leased", or "intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(201), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-202. - Definitions. 
(a)  Accessory structure. Any structural addition to the mobile home which includes awnings, cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets, and similar appurtenant structures. 
(b)  Building. A roofed structure erected for permanent use. 
(c)  Building inspector. Shall mean the director of the inspection and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia. 
(d)  Common area. Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying mobile home park. 
(e)  Density. The number of mobile homes or mobile home stands per gross acre. 
(f)  Driveway. A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home lot or stand or for common access to a small group of lots or common facilities. 
(g)  Easement. A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land. 
(h)  Enforcing agency. The director of the inspection and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Governing body. The Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(j)  Lot line. A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan. 
(k)  Mobile home. Any portable structure or vehicle exceeding 32 feet in length, which may be temporarily or permanently affixed to real estate, designed for highway transport, which may be on its own running gear and used for nontransient occupancy thereof, for commercial or industrial, or as a dwelling unit. Said portable structure may include flush toilet, bath, cooking and refrigeration facilities. 
(l)  Mobile home lot. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
(m)  Mobile home park. A parcel of land where a minimum of five or more mobile homes can be and are intended to be parked, designed or intended to be used as long term living facilities for families. 
(n)  Mobile home stand. That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions. 
(n)(1) Mobile home subdivision. A subdivision with lots to be sold and designed primarily for occupation by mobile homes. 
(o)  Occupied area. That area of an individual mobile home lot which has been covered by a mobile home and its accessory structures. 
(p)  Park management. The person who owns or has charge, care or control of the mobile home development. 
(q)  Permit. A written document issued by the inspection and code and enforcement division allowing a person to locate a mobile home or to construct, alter or extend a mobile home development under the provisions of this chapter. 
(r)  Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity. 
(s)  Private street. A private way which affords principal means or access to abutting individual mobile home stand and auxiliary buildings. 
(t)  Public street. A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties. 
(u)  Right-of-way. The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists. 
(v)  Service building. A structure housing sanitary, operational, office, recreational, maintenance and other facilities built to conform to required standards. 
(w)  Sewer connection. Pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewer system serving the mobile home park. 
(x)  Sewer riser pipe. That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home stand. 
(y)  Travel trailer. A vehicular portable structure not exceeding 32 feet in length designed for travel, recreational and vacation uses. 
(z)  Travel trailer court. An area where one or more automobile trailers or trailer coaches can be parked, designed or intended to be used as temporary living quarters for one or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients, whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
(aa)  Water connection. All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home. 
(bb)  Water riser pipe. The water riser pipe is that portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home stand. 
(cc)  Water service pipe. The water service pipe consists of all pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from the water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(202), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 77-135, § 1, 11-8-77; Ord. No. 79-150, § 3, 12-27-79; Ord. No. 84-44, 5-22-84) 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 13B-301. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a mobile home or to construct, alter or extend any mobile home within the limits of Columbus, Georgia unless he holds a valid permit issued by the inspection and code and enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia. Construction must begin within 180 days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(301), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-302. - Applications. 
All applications for permits for mobile home parks and travel trailer courts shall be submitted to the inspections and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia, after submission and approval of the final site plan by the planning division. Site plans for mobile home subdivision lots will be submitted to and approved by the inspections and code enforcement division. 
302.01. MOBILE HOME SITE PLAN LAYOUT. A mobile home site plan layout shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch and shall show the following information: 
(a)  Five black or blue line prints of the final site plan on or before the first working day of the month shall be submitted to the planning division and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors. 
(2)  Name and address of the owner of the land. 
(3)  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(4)  Scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
(5)  North arrow. 
(6)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
(7)  The number, location and size of all mobile home lots or stands. 
(8)  The location, width and area of roadways, parkways, streets, driveways and walks. 
(9)  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
(10)  Location and design of parking spaces. 
(11)  Location and acreage of recreational land. 
(12)  Gross density. 
(b)  Review and comment of the mobile home site plan layout shall be noted in a report of the planning division and on all five prints as submitted. 
(c)  Approval of the final site plan shall be noted on all five prints and attested to by the signature of the director of the planning division. Three prints shall be returned to the applicant, and two prints retained in the files of the planning division. 
Before acting on the mobile home site plan layout, the planning division may request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the proposed development, such as the district highway engineer, superintendent of schools, and public utilities. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the requirements of this chapter, and include comments on other factors which bear upon the public interest. The responsibility of securing said reports is that of the planning division staff. 
Any time after approval of the final site plan by the planning division, application may be made to the inspection and code enforcement division for a permit for the construction of the mobile home park. Five complete sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the inspection and code enforcement division with one set to be returned to the planning division upon issuance of a permit containing the following: 
(a)  The approved final site plan. 
(b)  Location of water and sewer lines and user pipes and manholes. 
(c)  Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewer lines, storm drainage system, refuse and sewerage disposal facilities. 
(d)  Plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed, altered or extended within the mobile home park. 
(e)  The location and details of lighting and electrical systems. 
Upon review of the application, and subject to evidence that the mobile home park meets the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Health by the Columbus department of public health, the inspection and code enforcement division shall issue a permit when a review of the application and inspection of the site demonstrates that the proposed or existing mobile home park meets the requirements of this chapter. 
302.02. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL. The procedure for obtaining site plan layout approval of a mobile home park is as follows: 
(a)  All plats submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the first working day of the month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 15th day of the same month. 
(b)  All mobile home site plan layouts submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the 15th day of each month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 1st working day of the following month. 
Please Note: When a 1st or 15th day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, preliminary site plans may be submitted on the following work days. 
(1)  At least five black or blue line prints of the site plan layout prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations shall be submitted. 
(2)  Review, comment and/or approval of the site plan shall be made by the director of the planning division; said review, comment and/or approval shall be noted on all copies of the site plan as submitted. Four prints shall be returned to the applicant and one print retained by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(302), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 79-150, § 4, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-303. - Inspections. 
(a)  The inspection and code enforcement division is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The inspection and code enforcement division shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The inspection and code enforcement division may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of public health relating to any of the rules and regulations of state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of public health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the inspection and code enforcement division. 
(d)  The health officer's representative, upon finding by inspection existing violations of requirements relating to the protection of health and/or safety of residents of the mobile home parks or others, shall notify the inspection and code enforcement division of such violations and requirements for corrections. The inspection and code enforcement division shall then proceed with enforcement under the provisions of appropriate sections of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(303), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-304. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit for a mobile home park may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(a)  Should the inspection and code enforcement division find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice to the permittee or owner that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within 30 days, the permit will be revoked. 
(b)  If at the end of 30 days, a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, the inspection and code enforcement division shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension in writing to the permittee or owner. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee or owner shall cease operation and/or construction of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(304), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-305. - Existing parks. 
(a)  Mobile home parks operating under a valid permit or license issued prior to August 17, 1971, may continue to operate under the terms of such permit or license except that such parks must comply with the standards required by section 13B-308. 
(b)  Existing mobile home parks shall be subject to the following sections: Sec. 13B-303. Inspections; Sec. 13B-304. Revocation of permits; Sec. 13B-306. Appeals; and Sec. 13B-307. Emergencies. 
(c)  Expansion of the capacity of an existing mobile home park shall require full compliance with all sections of Chapter 13B. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(305), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 99-56, § 4, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 13B-306. - Appeals. 
306.01. PETITION. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter relating to mobile home parks, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of zoning appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the inspections and code enforcement division a written statement of the grounds for such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension except in the case of an order issued under section 307. Upon receipt of such request, the board of zoning appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
306.02. HEARING. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
306.03. ORDER OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. After such hearing the board of zoning appeals shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(306), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 79-150, § 5, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-307. - Emergencies. 
Whenever the director of the inspection and code enforcement division finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health including violations of any of the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public health or Georgia Department of Public Health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of zoning appeals, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. 
The provisions of section 13B-306 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(307), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-308. - Nonconforming mobile home parks. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "nonconforming mobile home park" shall be defined as a mobile home park which was in existence prior to August 17, 1971 and which does not conform to the technical standards found in Article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  All nonconforming mobile home parks within the City of Columbus shall, within 14 months from the adoption of this ordinance, conform to the following sections of Article IV of Chapter 13B of the Columbus Code: 404.02-Soil and Ground Cover; 404.03-Site Drainage Requirements; 404.08(e)-Required Illumination of Park Street System; 404.09-Off-Street Parking; 404.12-Mobile Home Supports; 404.13-Identification; 405-Water Supply Requirements; 405.01-Distribution System; 406-Sewage Disposal; 407-Electrical Distribution System; 408-Community Service Facilities; 408.01-Structural Requirements; 408.02-Fireplaces, etc.; 410 (.01 through .05)-Insect and Rodent Control; 411 (.01 through .03)-Fuel Supply and Storage; 412 (.01 through .05)-Fire Protection. 
(c)  All nonconforming mobile home parks shall, within 14 months from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derived, comply with section 13B-409(.01, .02, and .07)-Refuse Handling. In addition, compliance with section 13-167.3 (B) or (C), or section 13-167.4 shall be required. 
(d)  No part of any nonconforming mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except as permitted by this chapter. 
(e)  Nonconforming mobile home parks shall, within 14 months from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, implement one of the following buffering/landscaping options: 
Option 1. Compliance with Category A of the Buffering and Screening Ordinance (Chapter 18A, Article VI of the Columbus Code). Under this option, all trees used to satisfy the minimum number of trees requirement shall be chosen from the list of permitted species included in the Buffering and Screening Ordinance. Species chosen from the list shall be either canopy trees or understory trees. 
Option 2. Installation of a six-foot chain link fence around the perimeter of the park with a minimum of 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet planted adjacent to the fence. Under this option, all shrubs used to satisfy the minimum number of shrubs requirement shall be chosen from the list of permitted species included in the Buffering and Screening Ordinance. Species chosen from the list shall be large shrubs, medium shrubs, or small shrubs, or a mixture of such. 
Option 3. One tree per mobile home stand present in the park shall be provided either at the mobile home stand, in common areas, or on the perimeter of the park. Under this option, any species of tree existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives may be counted toward satisfying the minimum number of trees. New trees planted to satisfy the requirements of this option shall be chosen from the list of permitted species included in the Buffering and Screening Ordinance. Species chosen from the list of permitted species shall be either canopy trees or understory trees. 
(f)  Nonconforming mobile home parks shall conform with the following roadway standards within 14 months from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives: 
(1)  Pavement. Roadways within the park shall be constructed in accordance with one of the following standards: 
a.  Six inches of compacted graded aggregate base, well crowned or sloped for drainage; or 
b.  Four inches of compacted aggregate base, with a one and one-half inch bitumens asphaltic concrete surface; or 
c.  Five inches of reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement. 
(2)  Width. Roadway pavement shall be of adequate width to serve the traffic of the mobile home park. 
(3)  Minimum maintenance standards. Roadways shall be maintained free of ruts, holes, and standing water. 
(4)  Inspections. All streets shall be subject to review and inspection by the city's engineering department. 
(g)  Nonconforming parks shall submit to the inspections and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia two copies of a site plan within 60 days from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. The site plan shall contain that information listed in section 13B-302.01(a)(1) through (12). The site plan shall also contain the location of refuse facilities, street lighting facilities, and the location of required buffer areas. 
(Ord. No. 99-56, § 3, 8-10-99) 
ARTICLE IV. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 13B-401. - Mobile home park size. 
The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be three acres. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(401), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-402. - Density. 
The maximum number of mobile homes or mobile home standards shall be eight per gross acre exclusive of all recreation areas. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(402), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-403. - Mobile home lot. 
(a)  Mobile homes may be located on individual lots. 
(b)  Each mobile home lot shall contain not less than 4,200 square feet of area. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(403), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-404. - Site improvement requirements. 
404.01. GENERAL. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
404.02. SOIL AND GROUND COVER. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other landscaping material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and/or mud. 
404.03. SITE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. 
404.04. NONRESIDENTIAL USES. 
(a)  No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except as permitted by this chapter or by the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities. 
404.05. SEPARATION BETWEEN MOBILE HOMES. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings by at least 15 feet of open space, provided that ten feet shall be the minimum distance between rears of mobile homes. 
(b)  An accessory structure which has a floor area exceeding 25 square feet, is attached to a mobile home or located within ten feet of its window, and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the nearest window, shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile home. 
404.06. RECREATION AREAS. 
(a)  In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate five or more mobile homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. 
(b)  The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of six percent of the gross area of the mobile home park. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 5,000 square feet. 
(c)  Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
(d)  Recreational equipment shall be provided for each required recreation area. 
(e)  Recreational areas shall be protected with suitable vegetation except in areas of extreme wear in which case paving, shaker sand, or other solid material shall be permitted. 
404.07. SETBACKS, BUFFER STRIPS AND SCREENING. 
(a)  All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway right-of-way and at least ten feet from the exterior park property boundary lines. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between an individual mobile home and adjoining pavement of a park walk, street or common parking area or other common areas. 
(c)  All mobile home parks adjacent to commercial, industrial or residential uses shall be provided with screening of a well-maintained opaque fence(s) along the property boundary line separating the park and adjacent zoning and uses. Said screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
404.08. STREET SYSTEM. 
(a)  General requirements. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads or highways to each mobile home stand. Said access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. 
(b)  Access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of 36 feet where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width or 27 feet where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than 100 feet long and does not provide access to abutting mobile home lots within such distance, the minimum road pavement width may be 24 feet, provided parking is prohibited at both sides. 
(c)  Internal streets. Paved streets shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements: 

 
(d)  Driveways. Paved driveways shall be provided to each mobile home stand where necessary for convenient access to each mobile home. The minimum width shall be ten feet. 
(e)  Required illumination of park street system. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: 
(1)  All parts of the park street systems: 0.6 footcandle, with a minimum of 0.1 footcandle. 
(f)  Street construction and design standards. 
(1)  Pavement. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense bituminous surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(2)  Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than eight percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of 12 percent may be permitted, provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of lateral curves. 
(3)  Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. 
404.09. OFF-STREET PARKING. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least two car spaces for each mobile home stand. 
(b)  Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve. 
404.10. WALKS. 
(a)  General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season, dust free, pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use and durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. 
404.11. LANDSCAPING. A minimum of three trees shall be provided at each mobile home stand. 
404.12. MOBILE HOME SUPPORTS. The area of the mobile home piers shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile home; thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotating and overturning. 
(a)  Each mobile home shall be placed on masonry piers or stands. 
(b)  The mobile home piers or stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure. 
404.13. IDENTIFICATION. Each lot, space or stand shall be numbered. Each number shall be easily identified from the nearest street or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(404), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 99-56, § 1, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 13B-405. - Water supply requirements. 
An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the Georgia Department of Public Health in accordance with rules and regulations for water supply quality control. 
405.01. DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a water connection. Such connection shall be in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(405), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-406. - Sewage disposal. 
An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer connection. Such system and connection shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia and the approval of the Georgia Department of Public Health and Georgia Water Quality Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(406), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-407. - Electrical distribution system. 
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, and each mobile home stand shall be equipped with a minimum of 100 ampere service, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable electric codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(407), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-408. - Community service facilities. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities such as: 
(a)  Management offices, repair shops and storage areas; 
(b)  Sanitary facilities; 
(c)  Laundry facilities; 
(d)  Indoor recreation areas. 
408.01. STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS. All structures shall comply with the building code of Columbus, Georgia in addition to the requirements contained herein. 
(a)  Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  General seeing tasks—five footcandles; 
(2)  Laundry room work area—40 footcandles; 
(3)  Toilet room in front of mirrors—40 footcandles. 
(b)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
408.02. FIREPLACES, ETC. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and woodburning stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to avoid fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. No refuse shall be burned at any time. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(408), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 99-56, § 2, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 13B-409. - Refuse handling. 
409.01. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
409.02. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent proof containers provided by the mobile home park operator or by residents (occupants) for each mobile home stand, in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. The containers may be placed at curbside for collection only on days of scheduled collection. At other times containers shall be located in a protected manner and restricted from general view. 
409.03. Where refuse collection stands are provided for common or joint use of occupants such stands shall be located not more than 150 feet from using mobile home stand, and shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
409.04. Where bulk waste containers of three cubic yards or larger are utilized, a suitable concrete pad shall be provided for parking the container, supplied with a drain connected to the sewage disposal facilities and available hot and cold water connections convenient for washing the container. 
409.05. All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
409.06. Where municipal or private collection service is not available, the mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to the city disposal site. 
409.07. Refuse incinerators and their operation shall comply with provision of the Air Quality Standards of Georgia, Department of Public Health, and shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(409), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-410. - Insect and rodent control. 
410.01. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority. 
410.02. Mobile home parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
410.03. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
410.04. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
410.05. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Mobile home parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth or ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(410), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-411. - Fuel supply and storage. 
411.01. NATURAL GAS SYSTEM. Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
411.02. LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS SYSTEMS. Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
411.03. FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS. All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(411), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-412. - Fire protection. 
412.01. The mobile home shall be subject to fire prevention ordinances adopted by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
412.02. Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
412.03. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention bureau shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire prevention bureau and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
412.04. Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
412.05. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by Columbus fire department and approved by the department of utilities. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(412), 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE V. - TRAVEL TRAILER COURTS 

Sec. 13B-501. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any travel trailer court within the limits of Columbus, Georgia unless he holds a valid permit issued by the inspection and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia and the department of public health. Construction must begin within 180 days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(501), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-502. - Applications. 
All applications for permits shall be submitted to the inspection and code enforcement division of Columbus, Georgia and the department of public health after submission and approval of the final site plan by the planning division. 
All persons, or their duly authorized agents, desiring permits for the construction, alteration or extension of any travel trailer court within the limits of Columbus, Georgia may discuss possible development site plans with the planning division prior to formal submission of their travel trailer court site plan. 
502.01. TRAVEL TRAILER COURT SITE PLAN LAYOUT. A site plan layout shall be drawn at an approximate scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch and shall show the following information: 
(a)  Five black or blue line prints of the final site plan on or before the first working day of the month shall be submitted to the planning division and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors. 
(2)  Name and address of the owner of the land. 
(3)  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(4)  Scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
(5)  North arrow. 
(6)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
(7)  The number, location and size of all trailer lots or stands and dimension of trailer spacing. 
(8)  The location, width, and area of roadways, parkways, streets, driveways and walks. 
(9)  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
(10)  Location and design of parking spaces. 
(11)  Location and acreage of recreational land. 
(12)  Gross density. 
(b)  Review and comment of the site plan layout shall be noted in a report of the planning division and on all five prints as submitted. 
(c)  Approval of the site plan layout shall be noted on all five prints and attested to by the signature of the director of the planning division. Three prints shall be returned to the applicant, and two prints retained in the files of the planning division. 
Before acting on the site plan layout, the planning division may request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the proposed development, such as the district highway engineer, superintendent of schools, and public utilities. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the requirements of this ordinance, and include comments on other factors which bear upon the public interest. The responsibility of securing said reports is that of the planning division staff. 
Any time after approval of the final site plan by the planning division, application may be made to inspection and code enforcement division and the department of public health for a permit for the construction of the travel trailer court. Five complete sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the inspection and code enforcement division one set to be returned to the planning division upon issuance of a permit containing the following: 
(a)  The approved final site plan. 
(b)  The location of water and sewer lines and user pipes and manholes. 
(c)  Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewer lines, storm drainage system, refuse and sewerage disposal facilities. 
(d)  Plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed, altered or extended within the mobile home park. 
(e)  The location and details of lighting and electrical systems. 
Upon review of the application, and subject to evidence that the travel trailer court meets the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Health by the department of public health, the inspection and code enforcement division shall issue a permit when a review of the application and inspection of the site demonstrates that the proposed or existing travel trailer court meets the requirements of this chapter. 
502.02. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL. The procedure for obtaining site plan approval of a travel trailer court is as follows: 
(a)  All plats submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the first working day of the month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 15th day of the same month. 
(b)  All travel trailer court layouts submitted to the planning division in acceptable order on or before the 15th day of each month will be reviewed and action taken no later than the 1st working day of the following month. 
Please note: When a 1st or 15th day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, preliminary site plans may be submitted on the following work day. 
(1)  At least five black or blue line prints of the site plan layout prepared in accordance with the requirement of these regulations shall be submitted. 
(2)  Review, comment and/or approval of the site plan shall be made by the director of the planning division; said review, comment and/or approval shall be noted on all copies of the site plans as submitted. 4 prints shall be returned to the applicant and one print retained by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(502), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-503. - Inspections. 
(a)  The inspection and code enforcement division is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The inspection and code enforcement division shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The inspection and code enforcement division may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of public health relating to any of the rules and regulations of state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of public health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the inspection and code enforcement division. 
(d)  The health officer's representative, upon finding by inspection existing violations of requirements relating to the protection of health and/or safety of residents of the travel trailer courts or others, shall notify the inspection and code enforcement division of such violations and requirements for corrections. The inspection and code enforcement division shall then proceed with enforcement under the provisions of appropriate sections of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(503), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-504. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit for a travel trailer court may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(a)  Should the inspection and code enforcement division find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice to the permittee or owner that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within 30 days, the permit will be revoked. 
(b)  If at the end of 30 days, a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, the inspection and code enforcement division shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension in writing to the permittee or owner. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee or owner shall cease operation and/or construction of the travel trailer court. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(504), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-505. - Existing parks. 
Travel trailer courts operating under a valid permit or license issued prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to operate under the terms of such permits or license. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(505), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-506. - Appeals. 
506.01. PETITION. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter relating to travel trailer courts, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of zoning appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the inspections and code enforcement division a written statement of the grounds for such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension except in the case of an order issued under section 13B-507. Upon receipt of such request, the board of zoning appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
506.02. HEARING. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
506.03. ORDER OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. After such hearing the board of zoning appeals shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the travel trailer court affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(506), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 79-150, § 6, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-507. - Emergencies. 
Whenever the inspection and code enforcement division finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health including violations of any of the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public health or Georgia Department of Public Health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of zoning appeals, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of section 13B-506 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(507), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-508. - Site improvement requirements. 
508.01. GENERAL. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
508.02. TRAVEL TRAILER COURT SIZE. The minimum size of a travel trailer court shall be one acre. 
508.03. SOIL AND GROUND COVER. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every travel trailer court shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid materials, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
508.04. SITE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. The ground surface in all parts of every travel trailer court shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. 
508.05. NONRESIDENTIAL USES. 
(a)  No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except as permitted by this chapter or by the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a travel trailer court located on a travel trailer stand and connected to the pertinent utilities. 
508.06. SEPARATION BETWEEN TRAVEL TRAILERS. 
(a)  Travel trailers shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 15 feet of open space. 
(b)  An accessory structure which has a floor area exceeding 25 square feet, is attached to a travel trailer or located within ten feet of its window, and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the travel trailer. 
508.07. RECREATION AREAS. 
(a)  In all courts accommodating or designed to accommodate ten or more travel trailers, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all court residents. 
(b)  The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of eight percent of the gross area of the travel trailer court. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 5,000 square feet. 
(c)  Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
(d)  Playground equipment shall be installed in each required recreation area. 
508.08. SETBACKS, BUFFER STRIPS AND SCREENING. 
(a)  All travel trailers shall be located at least 20 feet from any court property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway right-of-way and at least ten feet from the exterior court property boundary lines. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between an individual travel trailer and adjoining pavement of a park walk, street, or common parking area or other common areas. 
(c)  All travel trailer courts, adjacent to single family residences, commercial or industrial zone and uses, shall be provided with screening such as attractive and well maintained opaque fences along the property boundary line separating the court and adjacent zoning and uses. Such screening shall be a minimum of eight feet in height. 
508.09. STREET SYSTEM. 
(a)  General requirements. All travel trailer courts shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads or highways to each travel trailer stand. Said access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. 
(b)  Access. Access to travel trailer courts shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the court streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of 20 feet. 
(c)  Internal streets. Streets shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following minimum: 

 
(d)  Required illumination of court street system. All courts shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: 
(1)  Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps: individually illuminated, with a minimum of 0.3 footcandle. 
(e)  Street construction and design standards. 
(1)  Pavement. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(2)  Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than eight percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of 12 percent may be permitted, provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of lateral curves. 
(3)  Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. 
508.10. OFF-STREET PARKING. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all travel trailer courts for the use of court occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least one car space for each travel trailer stand. 
(b)  Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the travel trailer but shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the travel trailer that it is intended to serve. 
508.11. TRAVEL TRAILER STANDS. The area of the travel trailer stand shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation and shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the travel trailer due to inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the stand. 
508.12. IDENTIFICATION. Each lot, space or stand shall be numbered. Each number shall be easily identified from the nearest street or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(508), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-509. - Water supply requirements. 
An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each travel trailer court. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the Georgia Department of Public Health in accordance with rules and regulations for water supply quality control. 
509.01. DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The water supply system of the travel trailer court shall be connected in accordance with the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia. Each travel trailer stand shall be provided with a water connection. Said connection shall be in accordance with the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(509), 8-11-71) 
Sec. 13B-510. - Sewage disposal. 
An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all travel trailer courts for conveying and disposing of all sewage. One sanitary sewerage dump station shall be provided for each 25 travel trailer stands. Such system and connection shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of Columbus, Georgia and the approval of the Georgia Department of Public Health and Georgia Water Quality Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(510), 8-11-71) 
Sec. 13B-511. - Electrical distribution system. 
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances and each travel trailer stand shall be equipped with a minimum of 30 ampere service which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable electric codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(511), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-512. - Community service facilities. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities such as: 
(a)  Management offices, repairshops and storage areas; 
(b)  Sanitary facilities; 
(c)  Laundry facilities; 
(d)  Indoor recreation areas. 
512.01. STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS. All structures shall comply with the inspection and code enforcement of Columbus, Georgia in addition to the requirements contained herein: 
(a)  Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  General seeing tasks five footcandles; 
(2)  Laundry room work area 40 footcandles; 
(3)  Toilet room, in front of mirrors 40 footcandles. 
(b)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
512.02. COMMUNITY SANITARY FACILITIES. Every travel trailer court shall be provided with the following sanitary facilities: 
For each ten travel trailer stands, or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet, one lavatory and one shower for each sex. 
The building containing such sanitary facilities shall be within 200 feet of the travel trailers served. 
512.03. FIREPLACES, ETC. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and woodburning stoves shall be located, constructed, maintained and used as to avoid fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. No refuse shall be burned at any time. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(512), 8-17-71; Ord. No. 99-56, § 2, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 13B-513. - Refuse handling. 
513.01. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the travel trailer court shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
513.02. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any travel trailer stand. Sufficient containers and capacity of storage shall be provided to properly store all refuse pending collection at the scheduled frequency. 
513.03. Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
513.04. Where bulk waste containers are utilized a suitable concrete pad shall be provided for parking the container, supplied with a drain connected to sewage disposal facilities and available hot and cold water connections convenient for washing the container. 
513.05. All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the travel trailer court operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
513.06. Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the travel trailer court operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to the city disposal site. 
513.07. Refuse incinerators and their operation shall comply with provisions of the air quality standards of Georgia Department of Public Health, and shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the travel trailer court. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(513), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-514. - Insect and rodent control. 
514.01. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Examination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority. 
514.02. Travel trailer courts shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
514.03. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
514.04. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
514.05. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Travel trailer courts shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(514), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-515. - Fuel supply and storage. 
515.01. NATURAL GAS SYSTEM. Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
515.02. LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS SYSTEMS. Liquified petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
515.03. FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS. All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(515), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-516. - Fire protection. 
516.01. The travel trailer court shall be subject to fire prevention ordinances adopted by Columbus, Georgia. 
516.02. Travel trailer courts shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
516.03. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention bureau shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire prevention bureau and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
516.04. Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
516.05. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by Columbus fire department and approved by the department of utilities. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(516), 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION 

Sec. 13B-601. - Responsibilities of the park/court management. 
601.01. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park/travel trailer court is issued shall operate a park in compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
601.02. The park/court management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
601.03. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
601.04. The park/court management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. 
601.05. The park/court management shall notify the department of public health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(601), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-602. - Responsibilities of park/court occupants. 
602.01. The park/court occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain his mobile home lot/travel trailer space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
602.02. The park/court occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home/travel trailer on its mobile home/travel trailer stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
602.03. All canine animals kept or allowed within mobile home parks/travel trailer courts shall be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with health department requirements for such vaccinations. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(602), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-603. - Restrictions on occupancy. 
A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home stand and connected to water, sewerage and electrical utilities. 
Temporary permits may be granted as provided in section 22-27, paragraph (J)(1) of the comprehensive zoning ordinance for Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(603), 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flood plains, Ch. 11A. 

Sec. 13B-701. - General requirements. 
Any subdivision in an R (MH) zoning district shall meet all of the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-702. - Subdivision regulations. 
Mobile home subdivisions will be required to meet all of the requirements of the subdivision regulations of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-703. - Minimum size. 
The minimum size of a mobile home subdivision shall be five acres. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-704. - Lots. 
The minimum number of lots shall be five. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-705. - Foundations. 
Each single-family detached mobile home shall be placed on masonry piers or stands that secure the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-706. - Water and sewer requirements. 
Mobile home subdivision lots shall be served by water lines and sanitary sewer lines owned and operated by Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-707. - Lot access. 
No lot within the mobile home subdivision shall have direct vehicular access to a public street outside of the subdivision boundary. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-708. - Accessory structures. 
No accessory structures shall be permitted to be added to single-family detached mobile homes in a mobile home subdivision except for awnings. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
Sec. 13B-709. - Appeals. 
709.01. PETITION. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Council of Columbus, Georgia, provided that such person shall file in the office of the inspection and code enforcement division or the planning division in the case of matters pertaining to the subdivision regulations a written statement of the ground for such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension of the order. Upon receipt of such request, the council shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
709.02. HEARING. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
709.03. ORDER OF COUNCIL. After such hearing the Council of Columbus shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. 
(Ord. No. 79-150, § 7, 12-27-79) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 13B-801. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(701), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-802. - Conflict of ordinance; effect of partial invalidity. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the municipality the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(702), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-803. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect; and, to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(703), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-804. - Variances. 
Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship, the planning division may authorize a variance, if such variance can be made without destroying the intent of these regulations. In granting variances, the planning division may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards of requirements so varied. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(704), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-805. - Exceptions. 
The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the planning division in the case of a plan or program of such a nature, which in the judgment of the planning division provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions or as will assure conformity to an achievement of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(705), 8-17-71) 
Sec. 13B-806. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the adoption, publication and posting as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 71-210, § 1(706), 8-17-71) 
Chapter 13C - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 13C, §§ 13C-1—13C-4, is derived from Ord. No. 69-226, § 1, enacted Nov. 17, 1969. This ordinance did not amend this Code. See also the editor's footnote to Ch. 13B. 
Cross reference— Mobile home parks and travel trailer courts, Ch. 13B; zoning, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 13C-1. - Registration with tax office. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any mobile home within the City of Columbus to fail to register the mobile home with the tax office of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 69-226, § 1, 11-17-69) 
Sec. 13C-2. - Location; compliance with zoning laws required. 
The tax department of the City of Columbus shall issue a permit for the location or relocation of a mobile home in the City of Columbus only at locations authorized under the zoning laws of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 69-226, § 2, 11-17-69) 
Sec. 13C-3. - Permit to locate—Required. 
It shall be unlawful to locate or relocate a mobile home in the City of Columbus without first having obtained a permit from the tax department. 
(Ord. No. 69-226, § 3, 11-17-69) 
Sec. 13C-4. - Same—To be affixed to mobile home for inspection purposes. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain a mobile home in the City of Columbus without having affixed thereto, the permit from the tax office of the City of Columbus authorizing the location or relocation of such mobile home, said permit being affixed in such a manner that it may be inspected by an agent of the City of Columbus without the necessity of entering said mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 69-226, § 4, 11-17-69) 
Sec. 13C-5. - Fee for registering or relocating mobile home. 
A fee in the amount of $5.00 shall be paid for registering or relocating a mobile home in Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 71-283, § 1, 10-26-71) 
Sec. 13C-6. - Payment of state and local taxes prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
All applicable state and local taxes upon or in connection with a mobile home shall be paid before any permit with respect to said mobile home provided for herein shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 75-127, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 13C-7. - "Mobile home" defined. 
As used in this chapter the term "mobile home" means a mobile home or relocatable home, as such terms are defined in subsections (a) and (b) of Section 84-4802 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 75-127, § 2, 11-25-75) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Correctional institution—Conduct and control of inmates. 
(a)  Rules adopted. The rules of the State Board of Corrections governing the conduct and control of inmates shall apply at the Muscogee County Prison to all inmates sentenced from recorder's court, municipal court, state court and Superior Court for violations of city ordinances. 
(b)  Administration and enforcement. The warden of the Muscogee County Prison is charged with the responsibility of administering these rules for said city-county inmates in the same manner that he administers said rules for state inmates. 
(c)  Copies of rules; availability to public. The warden of the Muscogee County Prison shall maintain an up-to-date copy of said rules of the Muscogee County Prison and said rules shall constitute a public record and shall be made available upon request of any citizen upon paying any reasonable copying expenses. 
(Ord. No. 82-20, §§ 1—3, 3-23-82; Ord. No. 84-79, 8-21-84; Ord. No. 96-75, § 2, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 14-2. - Same—Inmate canteen. 
(a)  Administrator; canteen fund. The inmate store or inmate canteen at the Muscogee County Prison shall be under the control of the warden, and all profits received from the sale of goods shall be kept in a separate account to be designated as the "canteen fund." 
(b)  Approval of expenditures. All expenditures from the canteen fund in excess of $2,500.00 shall require approval by the Columbus Council in a written resolution; and the canteen fund shall be subject to audit under the same provision as other departments of the consolidated government, and, in any event, said fund shall be audited at least once a year by the internal auditor of the consolidated government. 
(c)  Records. Written records detailing all receipts and expenditures of the canteen fund shall be maintained at the Muscogee County Prison and shall be open for public inspection for a period of at least three years following each annual audit. 
(d)  Use of profits—Generally. Profits in the canteen fund shall be used for the benefit of prison inmates on items of recreation and entertainment and special events and any other items which improve the comfort and well-being and living conditions for inmates at the Muscogee County Prison. 
(e)  Same—For personal benefit prohibited. No inmate nor any officer or employee of the Muscogee County Prison shall use the profits of the canteen fund for his personal benefit, nor shall any profits in the canteen fund be used in any manner for the sole benefit of the appointed or elected officials of the consolidated government or any employees of the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 83-95, §§ 2—6, 12-13-83; Ord. No. 96-75, § 2, 8-6-96) 
Secs. 14-3, 14-3.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 14-1—14-3.1 and 14-4 relative to placing advertisements on public or private property, prohibiting women from loitering or drinking on premises when alcoholic beverages are sold, requiring minors to have written consent to enter establishments selling alcoholic beverages, prohibiting the purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by minors and prohibiting the keeping of alcoholic beverages for illegal sale. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 654, 655, 657, 786; Ord. No. 59-46, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 24, 1959; and Ord. No. 72-160, § 4, adopted Aug. 8, 1972. 
Sec. 14-3.2. - Possession or use of alcoholic beverages on school grounds and buildings prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use intoxicating liquors or malt beverages on the grounds or in the buildings of the public schools operated by the Muscogee County School District within the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-28, § 1, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 14-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-33, adopted May 2, 1995, repealed § 14-4, which pertained to minors prohibited in nightclubs or lounges and derived from Ord. No. 79-41, § 1, adopted May 1, 1979 and Ord. No. 80-105, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 26, 1980. 
Sec. 14-5. - Illegal acts relative to alcoholic beverages—Generally. 
(a)  Disorderly conduct—In public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to be disorderly while in an intoxicated condition on any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or grounds, or any other public place in Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Same—In places of business. It shall be unlawful for any person to be disorderly while in an intoxicated condition in any public place of business in Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  Prohibited actions. The following acts are declared to be in violation of this section by any person who: 
(1)  Accosts or forces his company upon any person while in an intoxicated condition; or 
(2)  Interferes with or obstructs or prevents the free use of any street, sidewalk or other public way while in an intoxicated condition; or 
(3)  Is loud or boisterous or uses profane language or panhandles or who shall refuse to remove himself or herself from the public streets, sidewalks or any other public conveyances, public halls, theaters or house of commerce or worship or other public places, when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority while in an intoxicated condition; or 
(4)  Shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the hall or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the City of Columbus, Georgia, while in an intoxicated condition; or 
(5)  Shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another while in an intoxicated condition. 
(d)  Alternatives to incarceration of offender. Any peace officer, in accordance with standard operating procedures promulgated by the chief of police may take or send an individual, who is in an intoxicated condition, to his or her home or to a treatment facility in lieu of incarcerating the person for violations of this section. Any peace officer so acting shall be considered as carrying out his or her official duty. The standard operating procedures shall set forth the conditions under which a peace officer may send an individual home or to a treatment facility. 
(e)  Habitual alcohol abusers. Any individual who has been transported to a treatment facility two previous times within the past 12 months immediately preceding shall be classified as a "habitual alcohol abuser" and shall be charged for a violation of this section. 
(f)  Penalties. Upon a finding or plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere in the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia, for any violation of this section, an offender shall be subject to punishment according to section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. If, in the discretion of the recorder's court judge, an offender shall be deemed suitable for participation in a detoxification program, then the sentence or fine imposed under section 1-8 may be suspended, conditioned upon the participation in, and completion of, a recognized detoxification/alcoholic rehabilitation program. 
(Ord. No. 81-121, § 1, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 14-5.1. - Same—Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property. 
Except as authorized by city license or by regulations promulgated by the city manager or the Columbus Council, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages on the streets and sidewalks or on the parks and playgrounds or on any other public property, either inside or outside of any vehicle or building; and this prohibition shall extend to parking lots and other outdoor premises of private businesses, either licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or otherwise licensed to conduct business, where such areas are normally open to the general public patronizing said businesses. 
(Ord. No. 81-119, § 1, 10-6-81; Ord. No. 84-60, 6-21-84) 
Sec. 14-6. - Illegal acts relative to food, automobile patrons; illumination required. 
Every person maintaining in the City of Columbus a lot on which beer or "soft-drinks" or lunches or sandwiches are sold to patrons in automobiles parked on such lot, during a period beginning each night at one hour after sundown and ending the following morning at five o'clock, shall keep the lot fully illuminated each night during such period. 
The term "fully illuminated," as used in this section, means that the requirements of such illumination shall consist of the illumination produced by one electric 100 candlepower lamp (or equivalent in fluorescent lighting) to give a minimum of one-half candle power for each square foot of area of said parking lot. Lights shall be of such number and so spaced on said parking lot as to produce a uniform illumination over the entire area of such parking lot. 
(Ord. of 3-12-46, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 14-7. - Annoying substances or devices; use, sale, possession. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, or keep on hand for sale, or offer for sale, or use, or possess in the city or its police district, any substances or articles commonly known as itch powder, sneeze powder, stink bombs or similar substances or articles. 
(Ord. of 11-20-34, § 1) 
Sec. 14-7.1. - Automobiles, motorcycles and mini-bikes; operation in public parks, parkways, watershed project areas, other public lands. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive all motor-driven vehicles, including automobiles, motorcycles or mini-bikes, in any of the public parks or parkways in Columbus, Georgia, except on roads designated for such vehicular traffic or in certain designated park areas prescribed by the director of the department of parks and recreation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to drive unauthorized motor-driven vehicles, including automobiles, motorcycles or mini-bikes, across dams in designated city watershed project areas, or in certain other designated city watershed project areas prescribed and signed by the director of the department of engineering. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to drive unauthorized motor driven vehicles on lands which are being developed for public use, landfills, lawns and yards of public institutions, the river spoil lagoon, drainage and stream easements, service-only roads, on all public lands not designated for public roadways, including access roads and public parking lots, and on all other public lands properly posted by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 71-200, § 1, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 81-82, § 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. 83-36, § 1, 6-7-83) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks generally, Ch. 18; traffic code, Ch. 20. 
Sec. 14-8. - Barber shops; Sunday closing. 
It shall be unlawful for any barber shop to be kept open or do any business on the Sabbath day. 
(Code 1914, § 798) 
Sec. 14-9. - Bathing in public; suits required when. 
It shall be unlawful for any one to bathe in any pond or branch within the corporate limits of the city between daylight and dark unless provided with suitable bathing suits, and no person shall bathe in the river anywhere between the north limits of the city and the southwest corner of the Exposition Park between daylight and dark, unless provided with suitable bathing suits; and from the southwest corner of park to southeast limit of the city persons may go in bathing at will. 
(Code 1914, § 661) 
Sec. 14-9.1. - Bay rum; sale within city prohibited; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell bay rum and bay rum preparations to any individual or ultimate consumer, or to possess the same for the purpose of sale, within the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction before the Recorder of the City of Columbus, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 57-162, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83) 
Editor's note— Section 14-9.1 is derived from Ord. No. 57-162 enacted on October 29, 1957. As said ordinance did not amend this Code it has been codified as said section at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 14-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-18, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 2011, repealed § 14-10 which pertained to begging; tramps and derived from the Code of 1914, § 660. 
Secs. 14-11, 14-11.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 14-11, derived from Code 1914, § 656, prohibiting minors in billiard or poolrooms, and § 14-11.1, requiring boats to have life preservers, derived from Ord. No. 60-33, § 1, adopted March 28, 1960, and Ord. No. 63-40, § 1, adopted May 13, 1963, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. 
Sec. 14-11.2. - Boats—Possession of pistol or rifle on board prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a pistol or rifle in any boat, bateau or other form of water transportation within the city limits and within the police district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 60-33, § 2, 3-28-60) 
Sec. 14-11.3. - Same—Speed limit on Chattahoochee River. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat at a speed greater than five miles per hour on the Chattahoochee River between Dillingham Street Bridge and Oglethorpe Bridge. 
(Ord. No. 64-6, 2-17-64) 
Sec. 14-11.4. - Same—Moorage regulations; erection of signs; penalty for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to moor or park a boat between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for longer than four hours on the following described part of the City Wharf of the City of Columbus, Georgia: Beginning at the northernmost line of the masonry wall of the old City Wharf and extending downstream to the waters edge. 
(b)  The superintendent of public works shall have appropriate signs erected along said area where mooring and parking is regulated by this section. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the city be fined as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 64-58, §§ 1—3, 8-24-64; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of Ord. No. 64-58, enacted August 24, 1964, being nonamendatory to this Code have been codified as § 14-11.4 at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Public waters defined with reference to operation of boats, § 26-7325, Ga. Code Ann. 
Sec. 14-11.5. - Burglar alarms. 
(A)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Alarm systems means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into a premise or to signal an attempted robbery at a protected premise, and with respect to such signal public police are expected to respond. 
(2)  False alarm means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary, robbery, or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises, and shall include negligently activated alarms; alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained; and alarms which are purposely activated to summon the police in nonemergency situations; but does not include an alarm caused by violent conditions of nature or other causes which are beyond the alarm user's or alarm business' control. 
(3)  Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises when an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and/or robbery is presently in progress on those premises. 
(B)  Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(1)  (a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain on any premises within the city, a burglar alarm system unless the person owning, operating or residing in the location where such alarm is installed has filed with the police department the names, addresses, and phone numbers of at least two parties to be notified that the alarm system is alarming. 
(b)  All commercial premises employing any alarm system shall post at the main entrance a prominent conspicuous notice of an alarm company representative who can be notified at any time and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the system or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery, or for anyone to fail to notify the police that the alarm was false when that person has knowledge that such activation was a false alarm. 
(C)  Fees. For a police response to any false alarm, the chief of police shall cause to be collected by the finance department from the owner, operator or resident of the premises having such an alarm system fees as follows: 
(1)  After having received notice that an alarm is activated and alarming, the police department shall notify the parties in the order requested by the owner, operator or resident of the premises. In the event the alarm is still activated and alarming 30 minutes after notification, or in the event the police department is unable to reach the parties to be notified, the owner, operator or resident of the premises shall be charged with violation of this section, and the police department shall call a professional alarm service company and have such company to deactivate and turn off the alarm. The police department shall be billed and pay for the service of deactivating the alarm, and the city shall then bill the owner, operator or resident of the premises. The bill submitted to the chief of police by the alarm service company must be submitted within seven days after the service is performed. 
(2)  Upon a fourth response to a false alarm at the same premises within a calendar year, the owner, operator or resident shall be notified by the finance department that any further false alarms within the same calendar year will result in a $25.00 fee being charged for each false alarm. 
(3)  (a) After a fourth response to a false alarm within a calendar year and for all succeeding responses within that calendar year, a fee of $25.00 shall be charged in addition to the service charge set forth in (C)(1) above if applicable. 
(b) The chief of police shall provide the finance department with a bi-monthly report of all false alarms responded to by the police department, and the finance department shall process, bill and collect all fees set forth in this section. 
(D)  Penalties. Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be summoned to the recorder's court for each violation and noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-114, § 1, 10-14-80; Ord. No. 92-28, 6-2-92) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 80-114, adopted Oct. 14, 1980, repealed former § 14-11.5 in its entirety and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new § 14-11.5 as herein set forth. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 72-192, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 1972, also pertained to burglar alarms. 
Sec. 14-11.6. - Business to furnish to chief of police names of persons to call in emergency situations. 
(a)  Names of two persons required. All businesses operating within the confines of Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia, having a permanent or leased premises, shall furnish to the chief of police the names, addresses, and phone numbers of two persons who may be reached in the event of an emergency by the police department. 
(b)  Issuance of code numbers. The chief of police shall issue a code number to said business which shall be posted on the front door of the business. Said code number shall allow the police department to maintain in its communications section the names of the individuals who will be notified in the event of an emergency. 
(c)  Compliance by existing businesses. All businesses currently operating in Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia, shall have 90 days from the effective date of this section to comply with its provisions. 
(d)  Compliance by new businesses. All new businesses which begin operation after the effective date of this section, shall comply with the section as a condition precedent to the issuance of a business license. 
(e)  Cessation of business. Any person who shall cease operating the business for which a code number has been issued shall notify the chief of police in writing within ten days of ceasing business. 
(f)  Persons responsible for compliance. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the president of a corporation, which is domiciled in Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia, to comply with this section. 
(2)  If a foreign corporation not domiciled in Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia, operates in Columbus, Georgia, it shall be the responsibility of its local manager to comply with this section. 
(3)  In all other cases, the owner of the business shall furnish the information required under this section. 
(g)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 80-107, §§ 1—7, 9-2-80) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 80-107, enacted Sept. 2, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—7 of said ordinance as § 14-11.6 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Business licenses, § 19-36 et seq. 
Sec. 14-12. - Cross, symbol, etc.; burning, placing, painting; consent required. 
(a)  Burning, on private property. It shall be unlawful for any persons to set fire to or burn, or attempt to set fire to or burn, or assist in setting fire to or burning, any cross, symbol or emblem upon private property owned or occupied by another within the city or its police district, unless the person so committing, or attempting to commit, or assisting in committing any such act secures, in advance, the consent so to do of all the owners and occupants of such property. 
(b)  Placing, on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or install, or attempt to place or install, or to assist in placing or installing, any cross, symbol or emblem upon private property owned or occupied by another, unless the person so committing, or attempting to commit, or assisting in committing any such act secures, in advance, the consent so to do of all the owners and occupants of such property. 
(c)  Burning, on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or burn, or attempt to set fire to or burn, or assist in setting fire to or burning any cross, symbol or emblem in the public streets, roads, or other public places. 
(d)  Painting, on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, mark, place or install, or attempt so to do, or assist in so doing, upon private property owned or occupied by another, any mark, writing, sign, cross, symbol or emblem, upon private property owned or occupied by another, unless the person so committing, or attempting to commit, or assisting in committing any such act secures, in advance, the consent so to do of all the owners and occupants of such property. 
(e)  Painting, on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, mark, place or install, or attempt so to do, or assist in so doing, in the public streets, roads or other public places, any mark, writing, sign, cross, symbol or emblem, unless the person so committing, or attempting to commit, or assisting in so committing any such act is permitted so to do by ordinance or action of the governmental authority in charge of such public streets, roads, or public places. 
Where a person is on trial for violation of this section, the burden shall be upon him to establish that he has secured the consent required hereby. 
(Ord. of 3-8-49, §§ 1—7) 
Sec. 14-13. - Camping; with vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp with his trailer, cart or wagon within the corporate limits of the city except upon the trailer camps or wagon yards set apart for that purpose; it shall be the duty of the chief of police to order all persons violating this section to remove beyond said limits or to such trailer camps or wagon yards. 
(Code 1914, § 783) 
Secs. 14-14—14-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 14-14—14-17 pertaining to disorderly conduct, disorderly houses and disturbing schools. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 645, 647, 659, 781, and Ord. of March 6, 1945, § 1. 
Sec. 14-17.1. - False application for admittance to Medical Center. 
It shall be unlawful for any person making application for admittance to the Medical Center of the City of Columbus, to furnish false or incorrect information to the staff of the Medical Center, including but not being limited to name, address, or manner in which applicant was injured. 
(Ord. No. 66-218, 10-31-66) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-218, adopted October 31, 1966, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included as § 14-17.1 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 14-17.2. - False information to 911 Center. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly communicate any false information to the 911 Center of Columbus, Georgia. 
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-77, 7-15-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-77, adopted July 15, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 14-17.2 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-18. - False registration—Signing fictitious name at hotel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to use, register, sign, indicate, furnish or give, either as his own name or that of another, any false, fictitious or incorrect name on the register of or to the representative of any hotel, apartment, boardinghouse, rooming or lodging house, motel, tourist court, motor court or place of abode. 
(Ord. of 11-23-54, § 1) 
Sec. 14-19. - Same—Occupying when falsely registered. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to apply for, request, enter, accept, occupy or use any room, apartment, house, office, building, habitation or structure of any kind whenever a false, fictitious or untrue name has been furnished for or by such person in violation of the preceding section. 
(Ord. of 11-23-54, § 2) 
Sec. 14-20. - Fire whistle, imitating. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the fire department, police patrol and ambulances, to use on any vehicle, the plain gong, or the "new departure," or rotary gong, or siren or any like sounding whistle, used by the fire department, or any gong or whistle similar thereto. 
(Ord. of 4-7-20, § 2) 
Cross reference— Imitating police whistle, § 14-48. 
Sec. 14-21. - Firearms, fireworks, fires; discharging, lighting on streets, lots, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any gun or pistol in any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, or in any of the lots thereof, nor set off any firecrackers or other fireworks nor make any fire in any of the streets or sidewalks thereof, unless by permission of the chief of police; provided, however, this section shall not apply to military companies upon parade, nor be in force upon such public holidays as the commission may from time to time designate, nor to any city officer in the discharge of his official duties. 
(b)  The provisions of this section of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, shall not apply where permission for the discharge of such firearm has been given to the person discharging same by the owner of the property on which said firearm is discharged, and the firing is so controlled that no bullet, projectile or any matter so discharged shall cross the property line of the person granting such permission, and provided further, that no such firearm shall be fired within 300 feet of a private residence or any other building occupied by a person or persons, other than a residence or other building which is located on the property on which the firearm is discharged. 
(Code 1914, § 723; Ord. No. 71-99, § 1, 4-27-71) 
Sec. 14-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 14-22, which pertained to fire alarms and derived from Ord. No. 92-48, adopted June 16, 1992, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 93-63, included herein as § 14-23. 
Sec. 14-23. - Police, fire and medical alarms. 
(a)  Alarm registration. 
(1)  Alarm registration requires the registration of all types of fire alarms, medical alarms, burglary and other types of alarms being operated in Columbus, Georgia. All alarms which directly or indirectly require the notification of or a response from the 911 Center must be registered. This is applicable to private alarms, commercial alarms or alarms monitored by an alarm service. Although an alarm may be monitored by an out-of-town company it must be registered on properties located in Columbus, Georgia. 
(2)  Alarms will be registered in the finance department of the city government. An application must be completed listing required alarm information. Upon completion of the necessary paperwork the applicant will be issued an alarm permit with a unique number. The alarm information will be entered into a data base and associated with the unique number on the alarm permit. The initial alarm registration period will run from October 1, 1993-December 1, 1993, the alarm permit will be valid for calendar year 1994. Alarm permits must be renewed annually between October 1 and December 31. The alarm registration program and the issuance of an alarm permit will be provided to applicants free of charge. 
(3)  A minimum fee of $30.00 will be assessed for failure to register an alarm, operating an alarm without a permit or operating an alarm with an invalid permit within the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
(4)  The permit must be displayed in a prominent location on or near the front entrance to the premises where it can be seen by responding units. 
(5)  The permit is not transferable. 
(6)  The permit must be displayed at the premises (address) listed on the application or it is not valid. 
(7)  If the home or business is sold, the permit holder must cancel the permit by notifying the finance department of the city government. 
(8)  Permits will not be required for motor vehicle alarms. 
(b)  Definitions. (For the purposes of this section): 
(1)  Alarm systems means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal a fire, medical emergency, burglary or other types of response in a premise, and with respect to which public firefighters, emergency medical service personnel or police officers are expected to respond. 
(2)  False alarm means any untrue report of fire, medical emergency or police response given to the 911 Center by telephone or messenger or by use of an alarm signal box; or the activation of an alarm system, and shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposely activated to summon the public safety personnel in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent conditions of nature. 
(3)  Response means the dispatch of any fire department, ambulance equipment or police personnel to the premises when an alarm system has been activated indicating a fire, medical or police emergency is presently in progress on those premises. 
(c)  Maliciously give or cause to be given false alarm; breaking or injuring alarm prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously give or cause to be given any false alarm; or to break or cause to be broken or in any manner injure, cut or damage or cause to be injured, cut, or damaged any publicly owned fire alarm signal boxes, poles, wires, or other apparatus, or to in any manner interfere with the same, or any part thereof, or the working of the same, or any part thereof, unless by the consent of or under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(d)  Activation of false alarm prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the fire department, emergency medical service or police department except in the event of an actual fire, medical or police emergency, or for anyone to fail to notify the fire department, emergency medical services or police department that the alarm was false when that person has knowledge that such activation was a false alarm. 
(e)  Fees. For a response to any false alarm, the fire chief, EMS chief or police chief shall cause to be collected by the finance department from the owner, business operator or resident of the premises having such an alarm system fees as follows: 
(1)  Upon a fourth response individually to a fire, EMS, police or other type of false alarm at the same premises within a calendar year, the owner, business operator or resident shall be notified by the finance department that any further false alarms within the same calendar year will result in a $150.00 fee for fire false alarms, $100.00 fee for emergency medical services false alarms and $25.00 fee for police and other types of false alarms. 
(2)  The fire chief, emergency medical services chief and chief of police shall provide the finance department with a bimonthly report of all false alarms responded to by the fire department, emergency medical services and police department, the finance department shall process, bill and collect all fees set forth in this section. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, and failing to pay any fee charged pursuant to this section within 90 days of the false alarm for which the fee is charged, shall be summoned to the Recorder's Court for each violation or instance of noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-63, 7-20-93) 
Sec. 14-23.1. - False information, giving to police officer; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give false information to any police officer investigating any matter in the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, or any part thereof, shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the City of Columbus, be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 67-157, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-67; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 67-157, §§ 1, 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included as § 14-23.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-46, adopted May 13, 1997, repealed § 14-24, which pertained to fortunetelling and derived from an ordinance adopted July 5, 1955, § 1; Ord. No. 74-177, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 1974; and Ord. No. 75-147, § 1, adopted Dec. 30, 1975. 
Secs. 14-25—14-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 80-149, enacted Dec. 23, 1980, repealed §§ 14-25—14-27, which pertained to dealers in precious metals and gems and which derived from §§ 1—3 of an ordinance of Feb. 12, 1935. Similar provisions were enacted as a new Ch. 15. 
Sec. 14-28. - Hats; wearing in theaters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear a hat or any other covering of the head which obstructs the view of other persons, in any theater, opera house, motion picture theater or any other building where an entertainment is given and an admission charged, during any performance at such theater, opera house, motion picture theater or any other building where an entertainment is given and an admission charged. 
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, manager, or any other person in charge of any theater, opera house, motion picture theater, or any other building where an entertainment is given and an admission is charged to permit any person to wear a hat, or any other covering of the head which obstructs the view of other persons in any theater, opera house, motion picture theater or any other building where an entertainment is given and an admission charged. 
(Code 1914, §§ 665, 666) 
Sec. 14-29. - Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc., safety precautions. 
It shall be unlawful to own, maintain, harbor, keep, possess or permit on one's premises any icebox, refrigerator, ice chest, deep freeze unit or cold storage vault or chest, equipped with a device which automatically locks it when the door is closed, unless the same is actually being used indoors for the purpose for which it was intended. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the owning, maintaining, harboring, keeping, possessing or permitting on one's premises of the items listed in the preceding paragraph hereof, indoors for the purpose of resale in a regularly operated business establishment, or indoors in the regular storage area of a licensed warehouse, storage or transit establishment or facility. 
(Ord. of 11-10-53, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 14-30—14-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 14-30—14-33, pertaining to ice wagons, derived from Ord. of July 7, 1920, §§ 1, 3, 4 and Ord. of July 13, 1920. 
Sec. 14-34. - Idiots, etc.; teasing, harassing. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to tease or harass, either by words, signs or acts, on the streets or public places in the city any simple minded, idiotic, or crazy person, or any cripple, or other unfortunate person, and it is hereby made the especial duty of the police department to enforce the terms of this section. 
(Code 1914, § 662) 
Sec. 14-35. - Impersonating policeman. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any of the police officers of the city by wearing a regulation uniform or badge of policeman or to impersonate such officer in any other manner. 
(Code 1914, § 641) 
Secs. 14-36—14-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 14-36—14-40, relative to indecent exposure and injury to or interference with property, derived from Code 1914, §§ 650, 747, 777, 779, and 780, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. 
Sec. 14-41. - Junk and scrap metal dealers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any junk shop or junk dealer, or any dealer in scrap metals, and any agents of such businesses, to purchase new copper or brass items or new copper or brass scrap, new or used vehicle or storage batteries, manhole or sewer inlet or water meter covers or any other metal item which originates with any utility installation, or new plumbing supplies or fixtures, without first requiring the seller to provide information to be kept as a written record by the buyer, which shall include a general description of the merchandise and any particular marks or numbers or other characteristics which would help to identify or distinguish the items as well as the time and date it was obtained by the purchaser and from whom it was obtained as well as the make and color of the vehicle in which it was transported and the vehicular license tag number and its state, county and date of issuance. 
(b)  The seller shall be identified by name, address, and telephone number and supporting documents such as a driver's license shall be required, and this information shall be kept in written form along with the information concerning the merchandise and its method of transportation; however, no records need to be kept nor will the provisions of this section apply in any manner to sellers who are licensed commercial or industrial enterprises and who are known by the buyer. 
(c)  Each business required to keep records under the provisions of this section shall retain the recorded items on its premises for a period of seven days after their receipt in unaltered form and in a place readily accessible for inspection by law enforcement officers or the general public. 
(d)  Businesses shall retain the required written information for a period of 90 days, and such information shall bear the signature of the owner or manager or some other agent of the business for each sales transaction. 
(Ord. No. 84-10, § 1, 2-7-84) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 84-10, enacted Feb. 7, 1984, repealed former § 14-41 and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new § 14-41 as hereinabove set forth. Former § 14-41 pertained to receiving junk from minors and derived from § 1 of an ordinance of May 5, 1915. 
Cross reference— Dealers in secondhand jewelry, precious metals and gems, Ch. 10; secondhand dealers, § 14-81 et seq.; pawnbrokers, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 14-42. - Loitering, loafing, idling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found idling, standing, loitering or loafing, within the city, or within its police jurisdiction, as follows: 
(1)  In, on, or upon the streets, avenues, lanes, sidewalks, alleyways, viaducts, bridges over the Chattahoochee River, cemeteries, parks, or other public property, school buildings or other public buildings, in such a manner as to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to threaten or to be detrimental to the safety, health, or general welfare of the city or the citizens thereof; 
(2)  In, on or upon pool rooms, saloons, beer halls, cafes, night clubs, or other places where alcoholic, malt or vinous liquors or beverages are lawfully sold, after having been directed by a police officer or by the owner, tenant, or other person in charge of such premises, to leave and vacate such premises; 
(3)  In, or upon any place or establishment used as a disorderly or lewd house; any place or establishment where illegally manufactured or nontax paid alcoholic, malt or vinous liquors or beverages are found, possessed, kept or sold; or any place or establishment where gaming, gambling or lottery laws are violated; 
(4)  In, on or upon railroad yards, rights-of-way, or depots; bus depots; hotels; theaters; places of worship; or other places of private property, whether residence, business or vacant, without the invitation of the owner, tenant or other person in charge of such places; or after having been directed by a police officer or by the owner, tenant or other person in charge of such premises to leave and vacate such premises. 
(5)  On pedestrian overpasses or their approaches. 
(Ord. of 5-25-25, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-56, § 1; Ord. No. 69-33, § 1, 3-17-69; Ord. No. 69-194, § 1, 10-20-69) 
Secs. 14-43—14-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 14-43 and 14-44 derived from Code 1914, § 799, and Ord. of April 27, 1948, §§ 1—3. Said sections pertained to the wearing of masks and public and/or public political meetings. 
Sec. 14-44.1. - Model airplanes, unlawful to fly except in designated areas. 
It shall be unlawful to fly within the city limits of Columbus, Georgia, model airplanes that are propelled by gasoline engines, except in the following described area: 
(a)  Privately owned property where the flight of such planes is confined within the boundary line of the privately owned property. This exception shall be applicable only prior to a complaint having been made to the police department by a person residing in a building the nearest part of which is within 500 feet of the ground over which such planes are flown and notice of such complaint has been given to the private owner by the police department. 
(b)  Property of Columbus, Georgia, north of Macon Road, which lies adjacent to the county morgue. 
(Ord. No. 60-14, § 1, 1-18-60; Ord. No. 60-32, § 1, 3-28-60; Ord. No. 88-114, 11-15-88) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 60-14, did not amend this Code; however, it is included as § 14-44.1, as hereinabove set out, at the editor's discretion. Ord. No. 60-32, amended aforementioned Ord. No. 60-14 by adding the material which the editors in their discretion designated subsection (e) or § 14-44.1. 
Sec. 14-44.2. - Entering unoccupied building without owner's written consent prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to enter an unoccupied house, apartment, part of a house, or other building without the written consent of the owner of the property or the owner's agent. Written consent may be shown by direct written permission, lease, rent receipt, work order, realty listing, or other suitable document which shows that a person has the owner's permission to be on and in the premises. Violators shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia, Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-24-32, § 1; Ord. No. 79-44, 5-8-79) 
Sec. 14-45. - Personal floatation devices required on Chattahoochee River between North Highlands Dam and Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. 
(a)  Personal floatation devices (PFDs) required on Chattahoochee River between North Highlands Dam and the southern property line of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, canoe, kayak, raft, jet-ski, or use any other vessel on the Chattahoochee River between the North Highlands Dam and the southern property line of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center without wearing a personal floatation device as defined in O.C.G.A. § 52-7-3. 
For purposes of this Code section, "vessel" shall have the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. § 52-7-3. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to sanctioned swimming events or competitions where rescue personnel are present. 
(Ord. No. 12-52, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 14-45.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The former section 14-45.1 was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said section pertained to obscene pictures or literature and derived from Code 1914, § 646; Ord. No. 69-27, §§ 1—3, adopted March 3, 1969; Ord. No. 70-337, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1970; and Ord. No. 70-343, § 2, adopted Dec. 21, 1970. 
Sec. 14-46. - Obscene writing, defacing property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark in obscene language, cut or otherwise deface any fence, house or tree in the city limits. 
(Code 1914, § 648) 
Sec. 14-47. - Obstructing officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist or oppose the mayor or marshal or any commissioner, policeman, wharfinger, health officer, or other officer of the city in the performance of any duty required of such officer by the laws and ordinances or orders of the city or the authorities thereof. 
(Code 1914, § 639) 
Sec. 14-47.1. - Oliver, Eagle-Phenix, North Highland Dams and Reservoirs; use restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to swim, operate a boat, or otherwise approach upon the impounded waters of the Oliver Dam Reservoir closer than 300 feet of said Oliver Dam. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to swim, operate a boat or otherwise approach the impounded waters of the Eagle-Phenix Dam Reservoir and the North Highland Dam Reservoir closer than 300 feet to such dams. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to approach the North Highland Dam, or Eagle-Phenix Dam, or the Oliver Dam, below said dams closer than 300 feet. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to recreational activities that occur in and beside the Chattahoochee River as part of the creation of the Chattahoochee River Park from the North Highlands Dam to the southern property line of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. 
(Ord. No. 59-60, § 1, 11-10-59; Ord. No. 63-57, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-63; Ord. No. 11-16, § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. No. 12-52, § 2, 12-4-12) 
Cross reference— Speed limits for boats on Chattahoochee River, § 14-11.3. 
Sec. 14-47.2. - Boating speed limits and water skiing on Lake Oliver. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat at a greater speed than ten miles per hour within 1,000 feet of the municipal marina dock on Lake Oliver, except in that portion of the water which lies within 100 feet of the north bank of the impounded water, in which excepted portion it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat at a greater speed than 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to water ski upon the impounded waters of Lake Oliver within 1,000 feet of the municipal marina dock, except in that portion of the water which lies within 100 feet of the north bank of the impounded water. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to construction activities that occur in and beside the Chattahoochee River as part of the restoration project to be supervised by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 60-66, §§ 1—3, 7-18-60; Ord. No. 11-16, § 2, 3-29-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 60-66, §§ 1—3, enacted July 18, 1960, added the provisions codified as § 14-47.2. Since said ordinance did not expressly amend this Code, it has been so codified at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 14-47.3. - Places endangered by rising water; occupying prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any area in the river surrounded by water on which said person might be entrapped by rising water. The provisions of this section shall not apply to recreational activities that occur in and beside the Chattahoochee River as part of the creation of the Chattahoochee River Park from the North Highlands Dam to the southern property line of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. 
(Ord. No. 63-63, 1-8-63; Ord. No. 11-16, § 3, 3-29-11; Ord. No. 12-52, § 3, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 14-47.4. - Swimming prohibited at Municipal Marina on Lake Oliver. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go swimming, or to permit a minor in his or her custody or care to go swimming, from the banks, docks or ramps, of the Municipal Marina on Lake Oliver, in the city. 
(Ord. No. 66-157, § 1, 8-1-66) 
Editor's note— Section 14-47.4 is derived from Ord. No. 66-157, adopted August 1, 1966. This ordinance, which was nonamendatory of this Code, was codified in the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 14-47.5. - Swimming prohibited at Municipal Docks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go swimming or to permit a minor in his or her custody or care to go swimming within 300 feet of any municipal docks south of the southern property line of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. 
(Ord. No. 67-160, 8-21-67; Ord. No. 12-52, § 4, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 14-47.6. - Jumping, diving into water from bridges prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to jump or dive into any of the waters located in Columbus, Georgia from any bridge therein. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 1, 7-30-74) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74-127, § 1, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 14-47.6 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 14-48. - Police whistle, imitating. 
It shall not be lawful for any person other than police officers, or persons entrusted therewith by the police authorities, to use or blow, within the corporate limits of the city, any echo whistle or police whistle of the kind used by the police force as a police call. 
(Code 1914, § 642) 
Cross reference— Imitating fire whistle, § 14-20. 
Sec. 14-48.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 14-48.1, relative to the escape of prisoners, derived from Ord. No. 69-151, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 18, 1969, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. 
Sec. 14-49. - Profanity over telephone. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the operation of any telephone installed within the city, to make use of any vulgar vituperation or profane language into and over such telephone. 
(Code 1914, § 663) 
Sec. 14-50. - Transporting, receiving, aiding persons to engage in prostitution or sodomy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly transport a person into or within the boundaries of Columbus, Georgia, for the purpose of promoting that person's engagement in prostitution or sodomy. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly receive, offer or agree to receive another into any place or building for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution or sodomy or knowingly to permit others to remain there for either of such purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly provide money or anything of value to another for the purpose of inducing another to transport a person into or within the boundaries of Columbus, Georgia, for the purpose of promoting that person's engagement in prostitution or sodomy or for the purpose of inducing another to receive a person into any place or building for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution or sodomy. 
(Ord. of 6-12-19, § 1; Ord. No. 79-29, § 1, 3-20-79) 
Sec. 14-51. - Penalty for violation of section 14-50. 
Whenever any person convicted of a violation of the preceding section shall be licensed under any ordinance or law to operate an automobile or other conveyance for hire, the license shall immediately become void and of no effect, and no license to operate an automobile or other conveyance for hire shall hereafter be granted to such person for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 6-12-19, § 2) 
Sec. 14-52. - Loitering for purposes of prostitution, sodomy, pimping; definitions for section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of committing prostitution or sodomy or manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to purchase sexual intercourse or physical intimacies in an act of prostitution or sodomy. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether these purposes are manifested are that such person is a known prostitute, pimp or sodomist, repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain this conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a), a "known prostitute, pimp or sodomist" is a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of violating any ordinance of any local government or the law of any state defining and punishing any acts of prostitution, pimping, sodomy or related offenses. 
(Code 1914, § 658; Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 5-23-78; Ord. No. 78-70, § 1, 6-13-78; Ord. No. 79-29, § 2, 3-20-79) 
Sec. 14-53. - Persons suspected of having venereal disease. 
(a)  Categories of suspected persons. A person in any of the following categories may be reasonably suspected to have venereal disease: 
(1)  Any person who is arrested and charged with an offense in the nature of or involving loitering, loitering or entering barrooms by streetwalkers, associating with prostitutes, soliciting for or aiding or transporting prostitutes, prostitution, pimping, pandering, rape, sodomy, or any other crime related to sex and any person convicted of any such offense. 
(2)  Any person with a prior conviction of an offense enumerated in subsection (a)(1) hereof, reasonably suspected to have had contact with another individual reasonably believed to have had a communicable venereal disease at the time of such contact, and any person with a prior conviction of an offense enumerated subsection (a)(1) hereof who is reasonably believed to have transmitted any such disease to another individual. Any person who has had any such disease or who has been convicted of any offense of the kinds specified in subsection (a)(1) within 12 months next past, and who is reasonably believed to be engaged in any activity which might have occasioned exposure to a communicable venereal disease. 
(b)  Detention in jail. Suspected persons in the categories enumerated in subsection (a)(1) hereof may be detained in jail. When any person so detained is determined not to have venereal disease in communicable form the health officer or his authorized deputy shall release the individual from detention for health purposes. The detention of any person in jail under the provisions hereof shall continue only for such time as is reasonably necessary to examine such person and render treatment if such person is found to have a venereal disease in a communicable form. The provisions hereof shall not be utilized as, nor construed to be, a penalty or punishment. No person detained for health purposes under the provisions hereof shall be released from such detention even if he or she is otherwise eligible for release on bond or by reason of payment of fine, or termination of sentence imposed. 
(c)  Examination in jail. Every suspected person detained in jail under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be examined by the department of public health for the purpose of determining whether or not such person is, in fact, infected with a communicable venereal disease. Every such person shall submit to such examinations as are necessary and permit specimens to be taken for laboratory analyses. The detention of each suspected person shall continue until the results of such examinations are known and the person found to be free from any such disease, or, if infected, until the disease is no longer communicable. 
(d)  Treatment in jail. The department of public health shall treat every person suspected to have venereal disease who has been detained and examined in jail and found to have any such disease. The treatment shall continue until the disease is no longer communicable. 
(e)  Examination and treatment at department or by private physician. Every suspected person in the categories enumerated in subsection (a)(2) of this section who is not detained in jail shall be examined at the department of public health on an inpatient or outpatient basis as determined in individual instances by the health officer or his authorized deputy. Each such person shall submit to examinations as necessary and permit specimens to be taken for laboratory analyses and shall comply with the directions of the health officer or his authorized deputy with relation to hospitalization on an inpatient basis or attendance at the clinic or an outpatient basis, as the case may be. Each such person shall continue to follow these directions until the results of his or her examination are known and the person determined to be free from any such disease, or, if infected, until the disease is no longer communicable. With the consent of the health officer or his authorized deputy a suspected person may be at his or her expense examined by a doctor licensed to practice medicine and treated medically for such disease, if necessary. In these latter instances, the health officer or his authorized deputy shall receive reports of examinations and treatment and other information relative to the problems involved from the medical doctor selected. 
(f)  Authority of police to enforce section provisions. Police officers shall have authority to detain suspected persons in the categories enumerated in subsection (a)(1) for health purposes in jail in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection (b) for examination and treatment by the department of public health under the provisions of subsections (c) and (d). Police officers shall have authority to order suspected persons in the categories enumerated in subsections (a)(1) and (2) who are not detained in jail to report to the department of public health for examination and treatment at the direction of the health officer or his authorized deputy in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e). They shall also have the authority to order persons to report to the department of public health for examination and treatment, as aforesaid, who have been held for investigation of offenses of the types enumerated in subsection (a)(1) and who have been released without charges having been filed, and similarly persons who have been acquitted of any such charges and other suspected persons who have been released on bond. 
(g)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to refuse to submit to examination or treatment under an order as hereinabove provided or to violate any order of detention or to refuse to obey any order requiring submittal to examination and treatment at the department of public health. It shall be unlawful to refuse to obey any order of the health officer or his authorized deputy issued under the provisions of this section or to refuse to obey any order of a police officer issued under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 79-30, §§ 1—7, 3-20-79) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-30, adopted March 20, 1979, repealed § 14-53 which pertained to association with prostitutes and was derived from Code 1914, § 649. Said ordinance further directed that sections 1—7 thereof be codified herein as a new § 14-53. 
Sec. 14-54. - Railways—Alighting, boarding; while moving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person unconnected with the railroad trains, to get on the engines or cars of a train within the city, unless for the bona fide purpose of taking passage on the same. It shall be unlawful for any person unconnected with the railroad trains to jump on or off a moving train in said city; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed so as to interfere with persons meeting friends, or seeing them off on the train of cars, when the same are not in motion. 
(Code 1914, § 664) 
Sec. 14-55. - Same—Persons crossing trestles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross or attempt to cross any railway trestle or bridge in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply in any case where the railroad authorities in pursuance of their respective business make use of either of said trestles or bridges. 
(Code 1914, § 753) 
Secs. 14-56, 14-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 14-56, relative to building of structures or placing of animal carcasses on the river bank, and § 14-57, prohibiting slandering of the president or country, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, § 782, and Ord. of June 5, 1918. 
Sec. 14-58. - Slingshots, similar devices. 
It shall be unlawful to shoot gravel, shot or marble, or any other thing out of a gravel shooter, blow gun or marble sling, or other device or implement of like character. 
(Code 1914, § 652) 
Sec. 14-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-32, § 1, adopted April 15, 1975, repealed § 14-59 regarding slot machines, the prohibition of and types excepted. Said section was derived from Ord. of Jan. 30, 1939, § 1, and Ord. No. 58-89. 
Sec. 14-60. - Steamboats; captain to deliver offenders. 
In case of violation of any of the laws and ordinances of the city, when the offender is on board of any of the boats at the wharf or leaving the same, the commander of such boat shall be required to stop and deliver the offender on being signaled by any officer to do so. 
(Code 1914, § 651) 
Sec. 14-60.1. - Tattooing—Prohibited on persons under 18 without consent of parent or guardian. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual or firm, to tattoo or mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form marks or figures or scars on any portion of the body of any individual under the age of 18. This section, however, shall not apply to any minor whose parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall in writing consent to such act of tattooing. 
(Ord. No. 57-72, § 1; Ord. No. 76-49, § 1, 5—4-76) 
Sec. 14-60.2. - Same—Prohibited on persons under influence of intoxicating liquor, malt beverages or drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual or firm, to tattoo or mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form marks or figures or scars on any portion of the body of any individual who is under the influence to any extent of intoxicating liquors, malt beverages or drugs. 
(Ord. No. 57-72, § 2) 
Sec. 14-60.3. - Same—Prohibited on Sunday or Sabbath days. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual or firm to conduct the business of tattooing or marking or coloring the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form marks or figures or scars on any portion of the body of any individual on Sunday or the Sabbath days. 
(Ord. No. 57-72, § 3) 
Sec. 14-60.4. - Same—Penalty for violation of provisions. 
Any person violating this ordinance [sections 14-60.1 through 14-60.4 of this Code] shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the City of Columbus, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 57-72, § 4) 
Sec. 14-61. - Vending candy, etc., near schools; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any ice cream, peanut, candy or fruit vendor to sell ice cream, peanuts, candy or fruit within 500 feet of any public school in any street or sidewalk in the city, or to take any stand for the purpose of selling such merchandise within 500 feet of any public school without first obtaining permission from the principal of such public school. 
(Ord. No. 9-7-21, § 1) 
Sec. 14-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-70, § 1, enacted June 13, 1978, repealed § 14-62, relative to running wires over roofs of houses, derived from Code 1914, § 785. 
Sec. 14-62.1. - Smoking on buses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person riding the buses of the Columbus Transit System (METRA) to smoke tobacco or any similar substance in any fashion or form. 
(b)  Appropriate signs shall be erected in all buses. 
(Ord. No. 88-15, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-88) 
Editor's note— Former § 14-62.1 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 88-15, adopted Feb. 16, 1988, which did not specifically amend the Code. The deleted provisions pertained to "no smoking" areas on city buses and derived from Ord. No. 76-115, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 17, 1976. 
Sec. 14-62.2. - Disorderly conduct generally. 
(a)  A person may be charged with, and convicted of, the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following acts: 
(1)  Performs an unlawful act of violence or performs any other act in such a violent and tumultuous manner that the public peace and tranquility is disturbed; 
(2)  Verbally or physically harasses, menaces, or intimidates a person to the disturbance of the public peace; 
(3)  Engages in a fight in public which is not a part of an authorized exhibition; 
(4)  Recklessly or knowingly commits an act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession; 
(5)  Without provocation, uses to, or of another, in that person's presence, opprobrious, abusive, or obscene words which by their very utterance tend to incite a person to an immediate breach of the peace; 
(6)  Enters upon the grounds of any school, with no lawful business there, and remains there to the disturbance and disruption of the school and its activities; 
(7)  Exhibits oneself in public in an indecent or lewd manner to the disturbance of the public peace and tranquility; 
(8)  Is in a public place or, without permission or invitation, upon the property of another, in a state of drunkenness exemplified by boisterous, vulgar, profane, or loud language, or by indecent personal condition, or by indecent act. 
(b)  A person convicted of disorderly conduct by reason of committing one of the preceding acts shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-73, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-73 amended this Code, but did not specify the manner of amendment, hence inclusion of §§ 1, 2 herein as § 14-62.2 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 14-62.3. - Billiard rooms and tables regulated. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Georgia Laws 1978, pages 1488, 1489 and 1490, and the home rule authority granted to this government by Georgia law, billiard rooms and tables are hereby subject to licensing and regulation by Columbus, Georgia. None of the laws found in Georgia Code Annotated, Chapter 84-16 as the chapter exists, or is hereafter amended, shall apply to billiard rooms and tables. 
(b)  The licensing and regulation permitted to Columbus, Georgia previously by state law is hereby reaffirmed. 
(c)  Billiard rooms and tables shall be licensed as provided by Columbus, Georgia Code, section 19-47, Code No. 1120. 
(d)  If any billiard room is physically connected with an establishment that has an on-premise alcoholic beverage license of any type, or if any billiard table is located in such establishment, then the hours of operation of such billiard room or billiard table shall be the same as those permitted for the establishment under the alcoholic beverage control laws of Columbus, Georgia, and the State of Georgia. Any other rules and laws pertaining to such establishments by virtue of their sale of alcoholic beverages, such as the entry of minors into such establishments, shall apply to the billiard room connected with such establishment or to such table. 
(e)  If the billiard room or game room shall not be so physically connected with an establishment with an on-premise alcoholic beverage license or any type, or if any table shall not be so located, the foregoing provisions shall not apply. 
(f)  No billiard room shall have any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions which prevent a clear view of the interior. No interior partitions except those for closets, toilet rooms, or wash rooms shall be permitted. 
(g)  No games of chance or any form of gambling whatsoever shall be permitted or allowed in any billiard room or other establishment containing a billiard table or tables. This shall include any gambling based on the playing of games on the billiards tables. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to billiard rooms or billiard tables operated by private industrial concerns, philanthropic or religious associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, institutions of the State or of Columbus, Georgia, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such billiard rooms or tables for members, residents, or employees only. 
(i)  Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-89, §§ 1—9, 7-25-78; Ord. No. 81-118, § 1, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 14-62.4. - Injury to, destruction of apparatus used in supplying public services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to any company or Columbus, Georgia, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company or Columbus, Georgia, intentionally to divert any services of such company or Columbus, Georgia or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company or Columbus, Georgia, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such company or Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a), or proof that a person knowingly received the benefit of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) were done on premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person or persons are responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  Violators of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-91, §§ 1—3, 7-25-78) 
Editor's note— Section 14-62.4 is derived from Ord. No. 78-91 which ordinance amended Ch. 14 by adding the provisions included herein as § 14-62.4. 
Sec. 14-62.5. - Issuing identification cards prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to issue to another person any identification card containing a description of the person or such person's photograph or such person's birthdate or such person's social security number, or any such similar information purporting to be the identifying factors of such person carrying said card, unless such identification card is issued by a governmental agency or unless such identification card is issued by an employer for the purpose of identifying its employees or unless such identification card is issued by clubs or organizations for the purpose of identifying their members. 
(Ord. No. 85-41, 4-9-85) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 85-41, enacted April 9, 1985, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as § 14-62.5 is at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Types of weapons which pawnbrokers are not allowed to receive or sell or have in their possession, §§ 15-8, 15-9, 15-10; pistol, rifle prohibited on boat, § 14-11.2. 

Sec. 14-63. - Sale of pistols, cartridges—Record, inspection. 
All persons doing business in the city or its police district who sell or dispense pistol or pistol cartridges shall at all times keep in their places of business complete lists and descriptions of all pistols and pistol cartridges kept, sold or delivered by them, and the names and addresses of persons to whom sold or delivered, which lists shall be open to inspection at all times by members of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-49, § 1) 
Sec. 14-64. - Same—Notice; investigation; approval; waiting period. 
No person doing business in the city or its police district shall sell or deliver any pistol or pistol cartridges until all of the following regulations have been complied with strictly: 
Before selling or delivering any pistol or pistol cartridges, such dealer shall notify, in writing, the chief of police, in such notice giving the name, address and description of the prospective purchaser. The prospective purchaser shall, at the same time, furnish to the chief of police three written and signed testimonials vouching for the general good character of the prospective purchaser, and such prospective purchaser shall also submit to having his fingerprints taken by the police department of the city. The chief of police shall make full investigation, and should he, in his discretion, find that the prospective purchaser is of good moral character, and that such pistol or cartridges are desired for legal and purely defensive purposes only, he shall approve the sale; but if, on the other hand, the chief of police should find that the prospective purchaser is not of good moral character, or that the pistol or cartridges are desired for illegal purposes, or for other than purely defensive purposes, he shall disapprove the proposed sale, and when so disapproved, it shall be unlawful for any such dealer to sell or deliver such pistol or cartridges to the prospective purchaser. In the absence of the chief of police, his duties and discretion hereunder shall be performed and exercised by the officer of the police department in charge of such department during the absence of the chief. 
No pistol or pistol cartridges shall be sold or delivered by any such dealer until the period of five days shall have elapsed after the service on the chief of police of the notice of the proposed sale. 
(Ord. of 5-10-49, § 2) 
Sec. 14-64.1. - Control of sale of handguns; certificate required; handgun purchaser identification card for multiple purchases; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or otherwise convey any handgun to any individual without a certificate from the chief of police, or his designee, stating that to the best of his knowledge the applicant is free of felony convictions. If said applicant is found to be free of felony convictions, the chief of police, or his designee must by law furnish applicant with such certificate at the end of three days from the date application is made. Under no circumstances is the chief of police, or his designee, to deny such certificate to any person at any time other than for reason of prior felony conviction. 
For those applicants who make multiple handgun purchases during the course of the year, a handgun purchasers identification card shall be made available. This card shall exempt holder from the necessity of obtaining a certificate for each handgun purchased. Said card shall be available from the city license section upon receipt of a certificate from the chief of police, or his designee, stating that to the best of his knowledge the applicant is free of felony convictions. The card shall contain a physical description and picture of the holder and expense of issuance shall be borne by an issuance fee of $3.00. The card shall be valid for a period of three years from date of issuance. In the event any holder of a valid handgun purchasers identification is convicted of a felony, such identification shall immediately be revoked by the chief of police. 
(b)  Dealers selling handguns may submit application to the chief of police or his designee on behalf of the prospective purchaser, and the chief of police or his designee may return the certificate directly to the seller submitting the application. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, upon payment of a $5.00 processing fee by such a seller at the time an application is submitted, the chief of police or his designee shall return the certificate directly to the seller submitting the application on the date that the application is submitted. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, dealers or collectors selling handguns at gun shows may, upon payment of a $5.00 processing fee, submit application to the chief of police or his designee on behalf of the prospective purchaser, and the chief of police or his designee shall return the certificate directly to the dealer or collector submitting the application on the date that the application is submitted. 
(c)  Provided, however, that the terms of this section shall not apply to dealers holding federal firearms license when purchasing handguns. Provided further, that the terms of this section shall not apply to the disposition of gun collections by executors or administrators of estates. 
(Ord. No. 75-14, § 1, 2-25-75; Ord. No. 75-23, § 1, 3-25-75; Ord. No. 75-31, § 1, 4-15-75; Ord. No. 78-44, § 1, 5-2-78; Ord. No. 88-121, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-88) 
Sec. 14-65. - Dangerous weapons; prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall within the city or its police district, sell, exchange or keep on hand for the purpose of sale any of the following named articles: Shotgun or rifle with barrel length of less than 18 inches, knucks, dirk, sword-cane, blackjack, Bowie-knife, spring-back knife, switch-blade knife, or any knife with a blade exceeding four inches in length; but it is not the intention hereof to prohibit case knives, butcher knives or other knives customarily used for domestic or industrial purposes only. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry any pistol, dirk-knife, bowie-knife, switch-blade knife, ice pick, sling shot, sand club, metal knuckles, metal cake cutter, metal comb, razor, or any other dangerous or deadly weapons of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to jewelry, belts or other wearing apparel fashioned in such a manner so as to allow the use of the same as a weapon rather than as wearing apparel. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the transportation of such items to one's home when purchased for the use in such home and contained within the package in which the same was contained on purchase, nor shall the provisions hereof apply to hunters, fishermen, sportsmen, campers or workmen while such items are being transported for recreational or occupational purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-27-43, § 3; Ord. No. 71-253, § 1, 9-28-71) 
Sec. 14-66. - Exclusion from chapter. 
The preceding sections of this chapter are not applicable to pawnbrokers and pawnbrokers' sales stores, they being regulated by provisions of this Code specifically relating to them; but this chapter is applicable to all other persons, and the words "persons" or "person," as used herein, shall in addition to them, include their managers, agents, clerks and employees. 
(Ord. of 4-27-43, § 2) 
Sec. 14-67. - Toy pistols, cartridges, etc.; forbidden. 
It shall be unlawful, within the corporate limits or the police district of the city, to sell, use or possess any toy pistol, toy gun, or other instrumentality designed for blank metallic cartridges, or to sell, use or possess any kind of blank metallic cartridges adaptable to use with toy pistols, toy guns, or other such instrumentalities. 
(Ord. of 6-7-27, § 1) 
Sec. 14-68. - Firing guns, pistols in city prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to fire any gun or pistol within the city; provided, this section shall not apply to gun clubs, military companies upon such part of the city as may be set apart and designated for the use of such gun clubs or military company, or to law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties. 
(b)  The provisions of this section of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia shall not apply where written permission for the discharge of such firearm has been given to and is in the possession of the person discharging same by the owner of the property on which said firearm is discharged or when the owner is present and has granted oral permission to the individual discharging said firearm, and, in either event, where the firing is so controlled that no bullet, projectile, or any matter so discharged shall cross the property line of the person granting such permission; and provided, further, that no shotgun shall be fired within 500 feet, and no shotgun discharging a slug, and no other firearm of any kind shall be fired within 1,000 feet of the property line of any property on which a private residence or any other building occupied by a person or persons is located, other than a residence or other occupied building which is located on the property on which the firearm is discharged; and provided, further, that no shotgun discharging a slug and no rifle of any kind may be discharged on any property in Columbus, Georgia not in an A-1 zone; and provided, further, that the provisions of this section shall not apply where a shooting gallery is completely contained within a closed building. 
(Code 1914, § 794; Ord. No. 71-99, § 2, 4-27-71; Ord. No. 81-28, 3-24-81; Ord. No. 85-133, § 1, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 14-68.1. - Discharging air guns, crossbows, etc.; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun or air pistol, or any longbow, crossbow, or any other type of bow designed to discharge arrows, in any of the streets or sidewalks of Columbus, Georgia or in any of the lots thereof unless permission for the discharge of such devices has been given to the person discharging same by the owner of the property on which said devices are discharged, and unless the discharging of same is so controlled that no pellet, shot, arrow, or any matter so discharged shall cross the property line of the person granting such permission. 
(Ord. No. 62-124, §§ 1, 2, 11-26-62; Ord. No. 85-133, § 2, 12-3-85) 
Sec. 14-69. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall, upon conviction in the recorder's court, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. A single act or omission contrary to the terms hereof shall constitute a punishable violation. 
(Ord. of 5-10-49, § 3) 
Secs. 14-70—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 84-11, enacted Feb. 7, 1984, amended the title of Art. III to read as set forth above. Formerly Art. III was entitled "Purchase and Sale of Articles Commonly Stolen and Traded." Sections 2—4 of Ord. No. 84-11 amended several sections within the article in conformance with the title change. 
Cross reference— Dealers in secondhand jewelry, precious metals and gems, Ch. 10; junk and scrap metal dealers, § 14-41; pawnbrokers, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 14-81. - Secondhand dealers defined. 
Secondhand dealers covered by this article shall include for profit trade shops, swap shops, flea markets, and thrift shops, and any other person who buys or receives for the purpose of resale for profit used or new property which is still capable of being used for the purpose for which it was originally intended; but this article does not cover secondhand dealers, such as pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems, who are covered by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-101, § 1, 8-19-80; Ord. No. 84-11, § 2, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 90-92, 10-9-90) 
Note— See the editor's footnote at the beginning of this article. 
Sec. 14-82. - Registry; information required. 
Every dealer in the articles described herein shall keep a registry which shall contain the following information in connection with the purchase by such dealer of such article or articles: 
(1)  The name of the person or other entity from whom the article is purchased; 
(2)  The residence or place of business of such person or entity; 
(3)  Identification of such person or entity, including driver's license number or vehicle plate number of the seller; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or other entity from whom the article was acquired by the person selling the article to the dealer; 
(5)  A full description of each seller; and 
(6)  A serial and/or identifying number where available shall be secured from the seller. 
(Ord. No. 80-101, § 2, 8-19-80) 
Sec. 14-83. - Retention and availability of registry. 
(a)  The registry required by this article shall be retained by the dealer for a minimum of 90 days. 
(b)  Each dealer shall make the registry required herein available for inspection by any officer of the Columbus Police Department. 
(c)  In addition to the record-keeping requirements of this article, secondhand dealers will also be required to keep on their business premises, for a period of seven days, all items purchased or traded, and such items will not be altered in any manner and shall be open for inspection by law enforcement officers or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 80-101, § 3, 8-19-80; Ord. No. 84-11, § 3, 2-7-84) 
Note— See the editor's footnote at the beginning of this article. 
Sec. 14-84. - Duty of seller to furnish accurate information. 
Any seller of articles described herein shall give accurate, true and correct facts to the dealer, of all information required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-101, § 4, 8-19-80) 
Sec. 14-85. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for secondhand dealers or their agents to purchase or trade secondhand items from any seller or trader without first obtaining the information required by this article and without keeping and signing the records and allowing inspection of the goods as required by this article; it shall be unlawful for sellers or traders to dispose of merchandise in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-101, § 5, 8-19-80; Ord. No. 84-11, § 4, 2-7-84) 
Note— See the editor's footnote at the beginning of this article. 
Secs. 14-86—14-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 86-124, adopted Nov. 18, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence codification of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as § 14-96, comprising a new Art. IV, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Public parks, § 4-41.1 et seq.; buildings, Ch. 8; licenses generally, § 19-11 et seq., zoning, Ch. 22; definitions of terms § 22-3. 

Sec. 14-96. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Establishments or businesses which have as a major or predominant activity the sale of items defined under the term "adult bookstore" in the Columbus Zoning Ordinance or the Official Code of Georgia, and the showing of films defined under the term "adult movie house" in said ordinance and said Code shall not be located within a 600-foot radius of any property used for the following purposes or functions: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Public or private schools and nursery schools. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Teen centers. 
(5)  Libraries and museums. 
(6)  Buildings used for governmental purposes. 
(b)  Measurement of radius. The radius provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
(c)  Certificate to accompany license application. All license applications for such businesses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises, and the distance of the proposed premises from any prohibited location as determined under subsection (a). Such survey shall be coordinated and conducted by a registered surveyor contracted by the city, and the nonrefundable cost of such survey shall be paid by the applicant to the Columbus Consolidated Government when the license application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 86-124, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 01-52, 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-97. - Sexually explicit presentations harmful to minors. 
(a)  Definition. The term "harmful to minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors. 
(b)  Admission to certain performances; selling tickets prohibited. It shall be unlawful to knowingly admit minors under the age of 18 years to performances conducted in the facilities of or on the property of the consolidated government in which live sexually explicit presentations of the following nature, which are harmful to minors, are rendered or to sell tickets to such minors for such performances: 
(1)  Nudity involving the showing of male or female genitals or buttocks or nipples of female breasts; 
(2)  Simulations of acts of sexual intercourse or masturbation or the showing of erections of the male penis, regardless of whether or not performers making such simulations and showings are clothed or unclothed; 
(3)  Pictures or models in conjunction with performances for the purpose of portraying sexual organs or sexual conduct prohibited in the foregoing paragraphs; 
(4)  Use of four-letter sexual words, particularly such use which is repetitious in nature or designed to sexually stimulate the audience; or 
(5)  Portrayals of sado-masochistic abuse involving torture or whipping or other assault of one person upon another, particularly where one or both or all parties are clad in undergarments or other thin attire, or masks or costumes, or where the victim is physically restrained in any manner. 
(c)  Exhibitions; objectionable language. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit himself or herself to an audience attended by minors under the age of 18 years in the manner forbidden in the foregoing section or to actively use before such audiences objects or pictures or language forbidden by the foregoing section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to direct or manage or promote a presentation forbidden by the foregoing section before such audiences. 
(Ord. No. 87-32, §§ 1—3, 3-17-87) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-32, §§ 1—3, adopted Mar. 17, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as § 14-97, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 14-98—14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 90-28, adopted April 10, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—9 of such ordinance as a new Art. V, §§ 14-201—14-209, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Excessive noise at public assemblies prohibited, § 17B-1. 

Sec. 14-201. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the governing body of the consolidated government of Columbus to ensure its citizens an environment free from such excessive sound as may jeopardize their health, welfare and safety, or degrade the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 1, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-202. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article: 
"A" band level means the total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network. The unit is the db(A). 
Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far. 
Band-pressure level of a sound for a specified frequency band means the sound-pressure level for the sound contained within the restricted band. 
Commercial district means the following: 
(1)  An area where offices, clinics and the facilities needed to serve them are located; 
(2)  An area with local shopping and service establishments; 
(3)  A tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels, and gasoline stations are located; 
(4)  A business strip along a main street containing offices, retail businesses, and commercial enterprises; 
(5)  Other commercial enterprises and activities which do not involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity. 
Commercial district shall include, but not be limited to, any parcel of land zoned commercial under the Zoning Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia. 
Commercial purpose means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of conducting a business operation or function, or for the purpose of advertising any business, any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for or soliciting the patronage of customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment. 
Construction activities means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks as defined by O.C.G.A. § 25-10-(a)(1). 
Continuous noise means a steady, fluctuating, or impulsive noise which exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten minutes or more, with an accumulation of an hour or more over a period of eight hours. 
Cycle means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period. 
Decibel (db) means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound. 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually produces sound when operated or handled. 
Dynamic braking device means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or potential danger. 
Fluctuating noise means the sound pressure level of a fluctuating noise which varies more than six db(A) during the period of observation when measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter. 
Frequency of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit time and shall be specified. 
Industrial district means an area in which enterprises and activities which involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity are located. Industrial district shall include but not be limited to, any parcel of land zoned as an industrial district, under the Zoning Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia. 
Microbar means a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal to one dyne per square centimeter. 
Motor vehicle means any two or more wheeled vehicle or machine, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on the public roads and highways in the transportation of passengers or property, which is required to be licensed but does not include vehicles operated exclusively on rails. 
Noncommercial purpose means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. Noncommercial purpose shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes. 
Period, of a periodic quantity, means the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself. 
Periodic quantity means oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time. 
Plainly audible sound means any sound from which the information content of that sound is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythm. 
Residential district means an area of single-or multiple-family dwellings and shall include areas where multiple-unit dwellings, high-rise apartments and high-density residential districts are located. Residential district also includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, schools, courts and similar institutional facilities. 
Sound analyzer means a device for measuring the band pressure level or pressure spectrum level of a sound as a function of frequency. 
Sound-amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound-amplifying equipment shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound-amplifying equipment, as used in this article, shall not include warning devices or authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
Sound-level meter means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of noise and sound levels in a specified manner. 
Sound-pressure level, in decibels of a sound means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
Sound truck means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment. 
Spectrum, of a function of time, means a description of its resolution into components, each of a different frequency. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 2, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-203. - Decibel measurement criteria. 
Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars as measured in any octave band with center frequency, in cycles per second, as follows: 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000 and 8,000 or as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 3, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-204. - Special noise sources. 
(a)  Radio, television sets, and similar devices: 
(1)  Use restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
(2)  Prima facie violation. The operation of any such set, instrument, television, phonograph, machine or device at any time in such a manner as to create a plainly audible sound at either the property line in a residential district or 50 feet from any such device located on public rights-of-way or public property or 25 feet from the property line of property located within a commercial district on which such device is operated or in such a manner to create any noise exceeding the ambient noise level at the property line of any property (or, if a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment) by more than five decibels shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(b)  Hawkers and peddlers. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(c)  Animals. No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or bird otherwise permitted to be kept, which by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking, or other noise unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort or annoyance to any person. 
(d)  Machinery, equipment, pumps and fans. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five decibels based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars as measured in any octave band center frequency, in cycles per second, as follows: 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000, and for the combined frequency bands, "A" band. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to machinery and equipment being used for on-site construction. 
(e)  Vehicle repairs. It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle (between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day) in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in that area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(f)  Train horns and whistles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or sound, or cause to be operated or sounded between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day, a train horn or train whistle which creates a noise in excess of 89 db(A) at any place or point 300 feet or more distant from the source of such sound, unless such sound is required as a warning device under state or federal law. 
(g)  Mufflers. No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, air compressor equipment, motorboat, motor vehicle, or other power device, which is not equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise, and no such muffler or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass, or similar device. 
(h)  Trucks. No person shall load any garbage, trash on compactor truck, or any other truck, whereby the loading, unloading or handling of boxes, crates, equipment or other objects is conducted within a residential district or within 300 feet of any hotel or motel between the hours of 10:00 pm. and 7:00 a.m. 
(i)  Exhausts. The maximum permissible sound pressure levels of any continuous source of sound shall be as herein established for the time period and district listed in Table A of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such activities as production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, operating, or repairing either vehicles, materials, goods, products or devices. Sound pressure levels in excess of those established for the zoned districts of the city, in times herewith listed, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is an unnecessary noise and a violation of this subsection. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at the approximate location of the property line or the boundary of the public right-of-way, at a height of at least four feet above the immediate surrounding surface, on a sound level meter of standard design and operated on the "A" weighting network. 
TABLE A 

 
The sound pressure level limits, and provision hereof, applicable to commercial districts shall also apply to any parcel of land zoned as an agricultural district under the Zoning Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles operating on public rights-of-way; and bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any church, clock or school; the loading of any trucks; domestic power equipment and commercial power equipment. 
(j)  Construction. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall engage in, cause or permit any person to be engaged in construction activities in any residential or commercial district between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
Construction activities directly connected with the abatement of an emergency are excluded from the provisions of this subsection. 
(k)  Small power equipment. No person shall operate or permit to be operated on private property or on the public right-of-way within any residential or commercial district(s) any power equipment rated five horsepower or less and used for home and building repair or grounds maintenance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day. Such power equipment shall include, but not be limited to, lawn mowers, garden tools, snow removal equipment, electric or chain saws or any other power equipment used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance. Noise sound pressure levels shall be measured at a distance of 25 feet from the noise source. 
(l)  Power tools. No person shall operate on any property within a residential or commercial district or on any public right-of-way within a residential or commercial district, any power equipment rated more than five horsepower used for constructions, including but not limited to, chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers, riding tractors, or powered hand tools, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day. 
(m)  Sound amplifiers. The commercial and noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The sound amplifying equipment shall be operated only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day unless an extension of such hours is authorized by the chief of police after consideration of the standards set forth in subsection (p). 
(2)  The maximum sound emanating from sound-amplifying equipment shall not exceed the sound pressure levels established in subsection (i) as measured at least 25 feet from the noise source. 
(3)  In any event, the intensity of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, annoying, disturbing, or a nuisance to any person or persons. 
(4)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any church, clock or school. 
(n)  Warning signals. No person shall sound any horn or signaling device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or highway within the city, except as a danger warning, and then only for a reasonable period of time. 
(o)  Emergency work. Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health or welfare of the citizens located in the city, or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(p)  Consumer fire works. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1(a)(1): between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Provided; however, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(ii) and (iii), it shall be lawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on January 1, the last Saturday and Sunday in May, July 3, July 4 and December 31 of each year after the time of 10:00 pm and up to and including the time of 11:59 pm; and On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. The intent of this paragraph is to impose the same restrictions as to time on consumer fireworks as are applied to other special noise sources except where state law requires additional leniency. 
(q)  Additional regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this subsection exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise; 
(2)  The intensity of the noise; 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within the noise emanates; 
(8)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(9)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
(10)  The duration of the noise; 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; 
(12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 4, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 96-17, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-205. - Amplified sound. 
(a)  Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use, or operate within the city a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or public property without first filing a registration statement and obtaining approval thereof as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Registration requirements and duties: 
(1)  Registration statements—Filing. Every user of sound-amplifying equipment shall file a registration statement with the chief of police five days prior to the date on which the sound-amplifying equipment is intended to be used, which statement shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and user of the sound amplifying equipment; 
b.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the sound-amplifying equipment; 
c.  The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used; 
d.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
e.  Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes. 
(2)  Registration statements—Approval. The chief of police shall return to the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration statement unless he finds that: 
a.  The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
b.  The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
c.  The registration statement reveals that the applicant would not be able to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Registration statements—Disapproval. In the event the registration statement is disapproved, the chief of police shall endorse upon the statement his reasons for disapproval and return it forthwith to the applicant, who may appeal such disapproval to the Columbus Council. 
(c)  Fees. Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount of $25.00 per day, or any portion thereof, shall be paid to the city, if the loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee shall be required for the operation of a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes. 
(d)  Regulations. The commercial and noncommercial use of sound-amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both. 
(2)  The operation of sound-amplifying equipment shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day except on Sundays and legal holidays. No operation of sound-amplifying equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. The operation of sound-amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes on Sundays and legal holidays shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  No sound emanating from sound-amplifying equipment shall exceed 15 db(A) above the ambient as measured at any property line. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to operate any sound-amplifying equipment within 200 feet of churches, schools, hospitals or city buildings. 
(5)  In any event, the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness within the area of audibility. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 5, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-206. - Periodic review. 
The provisions of this article shall be reviewed from time to time by the Columbus Health Department, and the health department shall make recommendations at least once each year to whether the regulations set out in this article shall be amended or expanded. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 6, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-207. - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to air traffic at the Columbus Metropolitan Airport, parades, chimes, bells, cultural events, athletic games, or recreational activities or other functions authorized or licensed by the consolidated government or other governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 7, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-208. - Existing businesses. 
Businesses are allowed one year from April 10, 1990, to come into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 8, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Sec. 14-209. - Violations; penalties. 
Any violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 9, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 97-58, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 18-38, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Secs. 14-210—14-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-79, adopted Sept. 14, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—11 as Ch. 14, Art. VI, §§ 14-221—14-231, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 14-221. - Adult entertainment establishments prohibited where designated. 
After the effective date of this article it shall be unlawful to locate any adult entertainment establishment on sites prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 1, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 1, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-222. - Establishments existing at the time of enactment of this article. 
It shall be unlawful for adult entertainment establishments either existing at the time of the enactment of this article or established thereafter to be operated in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 2, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 2, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-223. - "Adult entertainment establishment" defined. 
Adult entertainment establishments are defined as businesses in which, as the major activity, customers congregate primarily for the purpose of viewing or associating with employees who display anatomical areas designed to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification: human genitals, the immediate pubic region, or pubic hair; buttocks to the extent of exposing the immediate anal area; female breasts to points below the nipples; male genitals in a state of erection, even if covered with opaque clothing; all of the above anatomical areas when covered only by transparent or diaphanous clothing. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 3, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 3, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-224. - Identification when applying for license. 
All businesses engaging in activities defined by the term "adult entertainment establishment" shall so identify themselves when applying for licenses or permits or certificates from any division or department of the consolidated government, and no such license or permit or certificate shall be issued unless the premises and the persons owning or operating the businesses comply with the criteria in this article; however, any such business located on a site that was not prohibited prior to the enactment of this article may renew but not transfer its license to operate. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 4, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 4, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-225. - Permits. 
In addition to all other requirements for doing business in Columbus, Georgia, adult entertainment establishments and all employees thereof shall be required to apply for and obtain a permit from the chief of police certifying compliance with this article. A non-refundable fee in the amount of $6.00 shall be charged for the preparation of each permit. It shall be the responsibility of the employer to see that the employees are carrying with them an identification permit at all times they are working. Said identification permit will expire each year on the birth date of the applicant and must be renewed at such time, and said permit must at all times be in the possession of such person affected hereunder for him or her to be eligible to engage in such business. In making decisions to grant or deny permits, the chief of police shall only consider whether an applicant has strictly complied with this article and its requirements. Said permits shall be either issued or denied within thirty (30) days of application. If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the chief of police, the applicant may appeal to the Superior Court of Muscogee County within thirty (30) days of the decision. If no decision is rendered by the chief of police within thirty (30) days of filing a completed application for a permit, said permit shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 5, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 5, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 00-28, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-24, § 1, 3-19-02) 
Sec. 14-226. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 600 feet of the property line of any church, school, community teen center, library, nursery school, day care center, playground, residential zone, or condominiums and multiple-family dwellings and townhouses located in A-O zones. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 6, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 6, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-227. - Persons convicted of felony or misdemeanor. 
No person shall own, manage, operate in any manner or be employed in any capacity by an adult entertainment establishment who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any federal or state felony within five years of applying for the permit from the chief of police necessary to do business or to be employed, nor shall any such person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any federal or state misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within two years of such application be issued such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 7, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 7, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-228. - Private modeling sessions prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall allow and no employee thereof shall engage in private modeling sessions or other activities involving sexual displays in which one employee is placed in a one-on-one situation with one customer, and a regular show area with open seating shall be required for such sessions or displays; neither shall any adult entertainment establishment or any employee thereof allow personal physical contact or close mingling between customers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 8, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 8, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-229. - Admitting minors prohibited. 
All adult entertainment establishments are prohibited during regular business hours from admitting minors as defined by O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 9, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 9, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-230. - License revocation. 
The chief of police is empowered to recommend the revocation of the license of any adult entertainment establishment in which the owner is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to any provisions of this article or any federal or state felony or any federal or state misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and the chief of police is empowered to recommend the revocation of the license of any adult entertainment establishment in which a manager or any employee (or employees) in two or more separate incidents on separate occasions is convicted of or enters pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 10, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 10, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 14-231. - Procedures for revocation. 
The procedures for revocation shall be the same as the procedure required by Columbus Code section 3-11(b). 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 11, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-21, § 11, 3-19-96) 
Secs. 14-233—14-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ESCORT SERVICES 

Sec. 14-250. - Annual regulatory fee. 
Escort services permitted under O.C.G.A § 48-13-9 shall pay an annual regulatory fee of $5,000.00 to the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia. All escort service businesses shall pay said annual regulatory fee plus an occupation tax as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Sec. 14-251. - Annual identification card. 
Any person applying for an escort service business license shall apply for the same in the occupation tax section of the revenue division of the consolidated government. Upon payment of the regulatory fee pursuant to section 14-250 of this Code, all owners, licensees and employees of the business shall submit to a background check and obtain an annual identification card from the chief of police certifying compliance with this article. It shall be the responsibility of the employer to see that the employees are carrying with them an identification card at all times they are working. Said identification card will expire each year on the birth date of the applicant and must be renewed at such time, and said card must at all times be in the possession of such person affected hereunder for him or her to be eligible to engage in such business. In making decisions to grant or deny identification cards, the chief of police shall only consider whether an applicant has strictly complied with this article and its requirements. Said cards shall be either issued or denied within 30 days of application. If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the chief of police, the applicant may appeal to the Superior Court of Muscogee County within 30 days of the decision. If no decision is rendered by the chief of police within 30 days of filing a completed application for an identification card, said card shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Sec. 14-252. - Prohibited locations. 
No escort service business authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 shall be located within 600 feet of the property line of any church, school, community teen center, library, nursery school, day care center, playground, residential zone, or condominiums and multiple-family dwellings and townhouses located in A-O zones. No home occupation license shall be granted for an escort service business. All applications for new escort service business licenses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed business and the distance of the proposed business from any prohibited locations described in this code section. Such survey shall be coordinated and conducted by a registered surveyor contracted by the city, and the nonrefundable cost of such survey shall be paid by the applicant to the Columbus Consolidated Government when the application is submitted, in addition to the regulatory fee. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Sec. 14-253. - Persons convicted of felony or misdemeanor. 
No person shall own, manage, operate in any manner or be employed in any capacity by an escort service business who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any federal or state felony within ten years of applying for the permit from the chief of police necessary to do business or to be employed, nor shall any such person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any federal or state misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or loitering for purposes of prostitution or sodomy within five years of such application be issued such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Sec. 14-254. - Other prohibitions. 
All escort service businesses are prohibited at all times from employing minors as defined by O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1. It shall be unlawful for an escort service business to allow or for any employee thereof to engage in private modeling sessions or other activities involving sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-102 in which one employee is placed in a one-on-one situation with one customer. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Sec. 14-255. - License revocation. 
The chief of police is empowered to recommend the revocation of the license of any escort service business in which the owner is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to any provisions of this article or any federal or state felony or any federal or state misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or loitering for purposes of prostitution or sodomy. The chief of police is empowered to recommend the revocation of the license of any escort service business in which a manager or any employee (or employees) is convicted on two or more separate occasions within any 48-month period of or enters pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to any such violation. The procedures for revocation shall be the same as the procedure required by Columbus Code subsection 3-11(b). 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Chapter 15 - PAWNBROKERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 81-21, enacted March 5, 1981, repealed former Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-9, and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new Ch. 15 as herein set forth. Former Ch. 15 pertained to pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems and derived from Ord. No. 80-149, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 1980, as amended by Ord. No. 81-10, § 1, enacted Feb. 3, 1981. 
Cross reference— Dealers in secondhand jewelry, precious metals, etc., Ch. 10; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 16; license fees for pawnbrokers, § 19-47(6340). 

Sec. 15-1. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all pawnbrokers in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawn broker who, in the performance of his or her duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Owner. Any person or partner or stockholder owning 25 percent or more of a business. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81; Ord. No. 05-4, § 1, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 15-3. - Regulatory fee. 
All businesses involving pawnbrokers shall pay an annual regulatory fee of $150.00, plus an occupation tax as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-4, § 2, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 15-4. - Revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked upon a conviction of the licensee or an employee of the licensee or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee or an employee of the licensee in the recorder's court or any other court of a violation of any of this chapter's provisions or upon a conviction of the licensee or an employee of the licensee or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee or an employee of the licensee in any state of any felony involving any offense or any misdemeanor involving theft-related offenses. 
(b)  The following procedures shall be followed in the revocation of licenses under this chapter: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the holder of a license at least two weeks in advance that the Council of Columbus, Georgia, will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked, and this notice shall include the specific grounds on which this recommendation to council will be made. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall notify the license holder, the director of finance, and the chief of police, or the director of public safety, as to the time that a recommendation for revocation will be heard. 
(3)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia, shall hear a recommendation for revocation at one of its regular meetings, at which time the holder of a license and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No license shall be revoked until a majority of the council so decides at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 15-5. - Character requirements. 
No license shall be issued to or renewed for any person who conducts a business in which the owner or manager or any employee has, within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony involving any offense or any misdemeanor involving theft-related offenses, in any state; and all licensees shall submit the identity of all owners and managers and employees to the Columbus Police Department and to the revenue collection division on a continuing basis as changes occur for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character requirements be fulfilled. No license shall be issued or renewed if it is determined that a person falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application for the initial business license or any application for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81; Ord. No. 05-4, § 3, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 15-6. - Location of businesses. 
All businesses regulated by this chapter shall be conducted at an identifiable street address which shall be provided on a license or renewal application which itself shall be turned over to the Columbus Police Department, and no licensee shall change the address for any business without giving advance notice to both the revenue collection division and the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 15-7. - Requirements upon receiving in pawn or purchasing items. 
All businesses regulated by this chapter shall fulfill the following requirements when receiving in pawn or purchasing: 
(a)  Require the pawner or seller to positively identify himself by driver's license, military I. D. card, alcohol beverage card, Social Security number, or any other means of identification that contains information re: Birthdate, sex, race, address, telephone number; and by any other relevant physical descriptive information, all of which will be contained on a form prescribed and provided to the business by the Columbus Police Department. 
(b)  Record on the same form which describes the pawner or seller a complete description of the merchandise pawned or purchased, including kind, style, material, color, design, and all identifying names, marks and numbers, and any distinguishing marks such as initials or serial numbers, as well as the time it was obtained by the pawner or purchaser and from whom it was obtained. 
(c)  For a period of seven days from the date of pawning or purchasing, post in a clearly visible or accessible place on the premises designated in the license for doing business the forms containing the above information, and hold on these premises in a place readily available for inspection by both law enforcement officials and the general public, all of these designated items in the same condition as they existed when first pawned or purchased. 
(d)  Require the pawner or seller to sign the police department form on a signature line which shall be preceded by the sentence "I do solemnly swear or affirm that the information provided by me on this form is true and correct. Adjacent to the pawner's or seller's signature there shall be affixed the right thumbprint of the pawner or seller, and the pawnbroker shall use ink and pad approved by the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81; Ord. No. 86-127, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 15-8. - Daily reports. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Effective June 1, 2005, such daily reports shall be computer generated in a software format that is compatible with software utilized by the Columbus Police Department, or in other such form as may be permitted by the chief of police. 
(2)  Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and social security number or the driver's license number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 05-4, § 4, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 15-9. - Receiving in pawn or buying from minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any business regulated by this chapter to receive in pawn, trade, or to buy from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this chapter, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Sec. 15-10. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 81-21, § 1, 3-5-81) 
Chapter 16 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For provisions relevant to peddling of agricultural products and implements, see Ga. Code, § 84-2010; for other provisions relevant to peddlers, see Title 84, Ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Solicitations for charity—Permit required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to solicit property or financial assistance of any kind, to sell or offer to sell any article, tag, service emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription or anything of value, on the plea or the representation that such sale or solicitation or the proceeds thereof is for a charitable, educational, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, on the streets, in any office or business building, by house-to-house canvass, or in any other public or private place, or by telephone, mail or personal solicitation or in any other way in the city unless such person shall have first obtained from the chief of police a permit to do so; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons where such solicitation or sales are made by the members of an organization to other members thereof without remuneration to the solicitor, or where such solicitation or sales occur upon property owned or leased by such persons; provided, however, that the permit required by this Code section shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 5-12-42, § 1; Ord. No. 96-61, 7-9-96) 
Sec. 16-2. - Same—Application; information. 
Such person desiring to do any of the acts detailed in the preceding section hereof shall first make a written application for a permit to do so to the chief of police. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name of person and organization applying for a permit to solicit and the address of its headquarters together with any evidence of tax exempt status as defined by O.C.G.A. Section 48-7-25 or Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting this solicitation. 
(c)  The purpose for which any receipts derived from such solicitation are to be used. 
(Ord. of 5-12-42, § 2; Ord. No. 96-70, 7-30-96) 
Sec. 16-3. - Same—Investigation; denial of permit; waiver of provisions. 
Upon the filing of such application, the chief of police shall immediately make an investigation to determine the truth or falsity of the recitals in the application, and the amount of the net proceeds which it is contemplated will be received by the organization for which such soliciting or sales are performed. In the event the chief of police determines that the organization in whose name such soliciting or sales are done will not receive at least 75 percent of the net proceeds derived from such solicitation or sales, he shall refuse to issue a permit for such soliciting or sales; and in the event he determines that any of the material statements of facts in such application are false, he shall likewise refuse to issue a permit. Where any person and the organization which he represents are known by the chief of police to come within the provisions above recited, the chief of police may waive the filing of a written application, and issue the permit provided by this section. 
(Ord. of 5-12-42, § 3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Same—Appeal, hearing, findings. 
Upon refusal of the chief of police to grant a permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, and within ten days thereof the applicant may appeal to the commission. If the commission, after a hearing, determines that the applicant is entitled to a permit, the commission shall, by resolution, direct the issuance of such permit by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 5-12-42, § 4) 
Sec. 16-5. - Farm products—Definition. 
The term farm products as used herein shall include vegetables, fruits, melons, chickens, eggs, dairy products, and all other products of farms or gardens. 
(Ord. of 7-13-48, § 1) 
Sec. 16-6. - Same—Delivery in street prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to peddle or sell farm products in the city where delivery of such products is made in the streets of the city; but it is not the intention hereof to prohibit the peddling or selling of such products where delivery is made directly to stores or residences. 
(Ord. of 7-13-48, § 2) 
Sec. 16-7. - Same—Time limitation on stopping vehicle. 
While engaged in travelling from residence to residence or from store to store and peddling or selling farm products to consumers, no vehicles shall stop in the same spot in the streets of the city for a longer period than 30 minutes. 
(Ord. of 7-13-48, § 3) 
Sec. 16-8. - Same—Near like businesses prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to peddle farm products to consumers in the streets of the city for any period of time while within 50 feet of a licensed store which keeps on hand or sells farm products. 
(Ord. of 7-13-48, § 4) 
Sec. 16-9. - Flowers or shrubbery—License or permit required for peddling. 
It shall be unlawful to peddle or offer for sale from house to house or place to place in the city or its police district any cut flowers, flower plants or shrubbery unless the person so peddling or offering the same for sale has with him at the time either a regular business license issued by the city or a written permit signed by the chief of police of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-33, § 1) 
Sec. 16-10. - Same—Persons excepted; places designated. 
The preceding section is not intended to prohibit the sale of wild flowers, evergreens or other plants or flowers by country people not regularly engaged in the flower business, where such sales are made at places in the city designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 3-28-33, § 2) 
Sec. 16-11. - Fish—Door to door peddling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents, to peddle or offer for sale upon the streets or in other public places, or from house to house or store to store, in the city or its police district, from any truck, automobile, wagon, or other vehicle, or from a basket or other container, or otherwise, any fresh fish, oysters, shrimp, crab, lobster or similar fresh fish or seafoods. 
(Ord. of 3-29-32, § 1) 
Sec. 16-12. - Same—Exceptions. 
The provisions of the preceding section shall not apply to: 
(a)  The delivery of such fish or foods upon orders previously taken, where each such order is delivered in a separate package or container in which it is wrapped at the regularly located place of business of the seller. 
(b)  The peddling of strings of fresh fish caught within 25 miles of the city, where such fish are peddled within four hours after being caught. 
(Ord. of 3-29-32, § 2) 
Sec. 16-13. - Meat, peddling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or agent, to peddle, sell, offer for sale, or to have in possession for the purpose of peddling, selling or offering for sale, any meat or meat products upon the streets or from house to house within the city or the police district thereof; provided, this section is not intended to interfere with the delivery of meat or meat products sold at or ordered from regular licensed butcher shops. 
(Ord. of 3-21-27, § 1) 
State Law reference— For provisions relevant to the inspection of meat products, see Ga. Code, §§ 42-401, 42-402, 42-406; as to sanitary regulations in the production of meat products, see §§ 42-401, 42-402. 
Secs. 16-14—16-30. - Reserved. 
Chapter 16B - PERSONNEL REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-213, adopted Aug. 17, 1971, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, codification as Ch. 16B was at the discretion of the editors. The ordinance is set out as enacted; however, the word "chapter" was changed to "article" to preserve Code format, and the section numbers were prefixed by the chapter number of this Code and the chapter number in the ordinance, to facilitate reference and use. 
Charter reference— Organization of consolidated government, and general provisions, §§ 4-100—4-103; department of administration, § 4-400; personnel review board, § 4-610; pensions and personnel regulations, §§ 8-300—8-305; protection of existing employees, § 9-106. 

ARTICLE I. - OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE 

Sec. 16B-1-1. - Authority. 
Section 8-303 of the Charter provides that the department of administration shall prepare personnel regulations for the consideration of the city manager. When approved, the city manager shall submit the regulations to council for adoption in the form of an ordinance. The regulations may be amended in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-1-2. - Purposes. 
The personnel regulations are adopted to provide for the recruitment and development of the best available employee for each position in the merit system of the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia, at all times. They provide for establishing orderly procedures for personnel administration in such a way to ensure: 
(a)  That employment in the merit system of the government shall be made attractive as a career. 
(b)  That all appointments and promotions to positions in the merit system shall be on the sole basis of merit and fitness, which, as far as is practicable, shall be ascertained by means of competitive examinations, and that this government shall be an equal employment opportunity employer, and that applicants and employees shall not be discriminated against because of race, color, creed, sex, political affiliations, age, physical disability, national origin, or any other nonmerit factor. Exceptions may be made where a specific age, sex or physical requirement constitutes a bona fide occupational qualification necessary to proper and efficient administration. 
(c)  That position classification and pay plans shall be adopted which shall conform with the principle of equal pay for equal work. 
(d)  That a performance rating system shall be provided where economy and effectiveness in personal services may be promoted in the mutual benefit of the employees, government officials, taxpayers and all the people of the city. 
(e)  That each employee in the merit system shall be encouraged to render his best service to the government. 
(f)  To facilitate maximum utilization of manpower and public service, cooperation will be extended in the following areas where agreements can be ascertained: 
(1)  Interjurisdictional recruiting, examining, certifying, training and other personnel actions. 
(2)  Adding to registers of eligible applicants with eligibility on comparable examinations in other jurisdictions. 
(3)  Appointing employees on the basis of their permanent merit status in another jurisdiction, with maximum protection of their retirement and other benefits. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, §§ 1, 2, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-1-3. - Positions covered—Generally. 
These regulations shall apply to all positions specified in the Charter, section 8-302, Merit System. 
All positions in the service of the government shall be in the merit system except the following: 
(a)  Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; 
(b)  The members of boards, commissions and authorities; 
(c)  The city manager, city attorney, director of public safety, recorders and recorders pro tem, clerk of council, and heads and directors of departments; 
(d)  Persons temporarily employed in a professional or scientific capacity or to conduct a special inquiry investigation, examination or installation; 
(e)  Temporary or part-time employees; and 
(f)  Such other positions as may be excepted by ordinance of the council. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-1-3.1. - Same—Employees of elected county officers, commissions, boards, etc.. 
Elected county officers and commissions, boards, or other bodies in the consolidated government may, consistent with the terms of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21 (1986 Ga. L. 764), place their employees within the merit system and under the jurisdiction of the personnel review board by making written application to the clerk of council, and such coverage of such employees shall be effective from the date of the filing of the application without any further action by the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 86-73, 7-8-86) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 86-73, adopted July 8, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as § 16B-1-3.1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 16B-1-3.2. - Hiring or rehiring of felons; exceptions; executive committee review. 
In all general government departments of the consolidated government, it shall be the policy that otherwise qualified individuals who have been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to felony offenses in any court of Georgia or other state or in any United States District Court, including parole or other forms of court ordered supervision for felony crimes will not be excluded from consideration for hiring where doing so does not unduly put the government, its employees or the citizens at risk. There shall be an executive committee, composed of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem, the city manager, the director of human resources, and a representative of the law enforcement to be appointed by the mayor which is charged with the responsibility of reviewing the cases where an applicant who has a criminal record as described above has been recommended by a hiring department and the department of human resources for a specific position. The executive committee shall review and approve such applicants by a majority vote of the total membership of five and only after giving due consideration to the needs of the government and the public interest involved as well as the likelihood that such an exception will be conducive to the rehabilitation efforts of the prospective employee involved. In evaluating a candidate, the executive committee shall take into consideration the severity of the crime and any recommendations that may be offered by prison or parole or probation officers, opinions of past job performance with the consolidated government or other employers, and the nature or sensitivity of the position to be filled with emphasis on the question of whether or not the previous crime is predictive of future job performance. Public safety departments are exempt from the application of this code section. The human resources department shall promulgate and this council may from time to approve administrative policies and procedures to facilitate the implementation of this code section. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, 2-9-88; Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 15-21, § 1,5-26-15) 
Sec. 16B-1-4. - Interpretation. 
The regulations are intended to cover most personnel problems and actions likely to be encountered. Those not specifically covered shall be interpreted by the personnel officer subject to the concurrence of the director of administration in keeping with the intent of the Charter and the objectives of those regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-1-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former § 16B-1-5, which pertained to general duties of the personnel review board; composition of the board, term of members; appeals and grievances and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 5, adopted Aug. 17, 1971; Ord. No. 71-287, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1971; Ord. No. 75-20, § 3, adopted March 18, 1975; Ord. No. 80-85, § 1, adopted July 15, 1980; and Ord. No. 89-39, adopted April 11, 1989. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 16B-1-6. - Veterans' preference. 
Procedures concerning honorably discharged veterans of any war will conform with Article III, Section VII, Paragraph XXIV, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia providing that equal preference be awarded such veterans as exists under Federal Civil Service Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-1-7. - Enforcement and administration. 
The responsibility and authority for the enforcement and administration of the rules and regulations set forth herein are vested in the department of administration. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 1, § 7, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-1-8. - Extension of the merit system. 
Upon the initial extension of the merit system to a program that has been established outside of the merit system, an incumbent may obtain permanent status through an open competitive examination; or if he has a specified period of service in the agency, at its discretion he may obtain permanent status if he passes a noncompetitive qualifying examination. If he does not pass, such employee may be retained in the position in which he has incumbency preference without acquiring the right of merit system status. An employee with permanent status under a merit system meeting these standards will retain comparable status if the employing agency is placed under the jurisdiction of another merit system. 
(Ord. No. 75-20, § 4, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-1-9. - Merit system executive. 
The Columbus Merit System of Personnel Administration will be administered by a qualified merit system executive who shall be the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 75-20, § 5, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-1-10. - Merit system review committee. 
(a)  A committee to be known as the merit system review committee is formally established. The composition of the merit system review committee shall consist of the city manager and the sheriff of Muscogee County as permanent members of the committee. The personnel officer and the affirmative action officer shall serve as permanent ex officio members and shall not have the right to vote. Other members of the committee shall consist of five department directors as voting members of the committee, who shall serve for one-year terms commencing July 1st of each year. The following department directors for even-numbered years shall consist of: The director of administration, the director of the department of engineering, the director of the department of finance, the director of department of community development, and the chief of the fire department. The following department directors for odd-numbered years shall consist of: The director of parks and recreation, the Muscogee County Tax Commissioner, director of the department of public works, director of the department of transportation and the chief of police. 
(b)  The general duties of this committee shall consist of: 
(1)  A continuous review and appraisal of the position classifications within the merit system; 
(2)  An examination of individual problems resulting from application of the merit system that may result in inequity or administrative problems; and 
(3)  An examination of special classes of problems that may arise from application of the merit system. 
(c)  The committee shall have authority to review and act upon requests for reclassification or upgrading of persons in the merit system on an individual basis. Also, the committee shall review and act upon requests for entry of new personnel in grades and steps higher than those normally specified for entry level. 
The merit system review committee shall make recommendations upon the request for reclassification without regard to identity of individual. 
The committee shall receive request for reclassification from full-time elected or appointed officers who serve in a supervisory capacity and department directors only. 
The official requesting reclassification shall be invited to be present at the committee meeting when his request for reclassification is being considered. 
Members of this committee, other than the City Manager, shall not be eligible to cast a vote in committee action directly affecting his own department. 
The committee shall make a determination on each request for reclassification within 45 days after the receipt of request. 
The committee shall not have the authority to act to create new positions or new grades or new classifications, and in this respect, it shall function as a recommending body to the council only. In its continuous review of the merit system, the committee may identify other problems which shall be referred to the council for appropriate action. 
(d)  The merit system review committee shall be authorized to meet from time to time as need arises and conduct its business under rules or guidelines established by the committee. 
(e)  The council shall receive reports from the merit system review committee which contain (1) the actions taken by the Committee; and (2) an up-to-date version of the merit system position classifications, grades, and pay scales in January, April, July and October of each calendar year. Recommendations of the committee for council action shall be submitted as need arises. 
(Ord. No. 78-96, §§ 1—5, 8-15-78; Ord. No. 83-1, § 1, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 84-89, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 84-90, 9-25-84) 
ARTICLE II. - POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 16B-2-1. - Definitions. 
The position classification plan is the official or approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes, including (1) a schematic index to the class specifications; (2) the class specifications and (3) rules of administration. It covers all positions under the merit system as specified by the Charter, section 8-302. 
(a)  For position classification purposes, a "position" is a group of currently assigned duties and responsibilities requiring the full or part-time employment of one person. A position may be occupied or vacant. 
(b)  A "class" is a group of positions (or one position) that: (1) has similar duties and responsibilities, (2) requires like qualifications, experience and minimum training and, (3) can be equitably compensated by the same salary range. 
(c)  The "class title" is the official designation or name of the class as stated in the class specification. It shall be used on all personnel records and actions. Working or office titles may be used for purposes of internal administration. 
(d)  "Permanent full-time employee." An employee whose position requires him to work not less than 12 months per calendar year, and not less than 40 hours a week is categorized as a permanent full-time employee. 
(e)  "Permanent part-time employee." An employee whose position requires him to work not less than nine months per calendar year and not less than 20 hours per week is categorized as a permanent part-time employee. 
(f)  "Part-time employee." An employee whose position requires him to work not less than nine months per calendar year but less than 20 hours per week is categorized as a part-time employee. 
(g)  "Temporary employee." An employee whose position requires him to work less than nine months per calendar year regardless of the number of hours worked per week is categorized as a temporary employee. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 1, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 72-75, 5-2-72; Ord. No. 75-20, § 6, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-2-2. - Responsibility for administration. 
The personnel officer under the director of administration shall be responsible for administering the position classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, § 7, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-2-3. - Allocation of positions; creation of classes. 
After the establishment of a new position has been approved, the appointing authority involved shall complete a position description covering the duties and responsibilities of each proposed position. The personnel officer shall allocate the position to one of the classes in the classification plan. If a suitable class does not exist, he shall recommend the establishment of a new class and after the adoption of the new class, as provided in section 8-304 of the Charter, shall allocate the position to it. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-4. - Allocation appeals. 
If an employee has facts which indicate to him that his position is improperly allocated, he may request the personnel officer to review the allocation of his position with the knowledge of his appointing authority. Such request shall be submitted in writing and shall contain a statement of justification. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-5. - Maintenance of plan. 
(a)  Each time a vacancy occurs, a position description shall be completed by the appointing authority and submitted to the personnel officer for a review of the allocation of the position. The personnel officer may waive this requirement in cases where he has determined that no material changes have occurred. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each appointing authority to submit to the personnel officer new position descriptions for all affected positions each time a department or division under his jurisdiction is permanently or substantially reorganized. 
(c)  The personnel officer may require departments or employees to submit position descriptions on a periodic basis, or any time he has reason to believe that there has been a change in the duties and responsibilities of one or more positions. 
(d)  Each time a new class is established, a class specification shall be written and incorporated in the existing plan. The class title shall be added to the schematic list of titles. Likewise an abolished class shall be deleted from the classification plan by removing the class title from the schematic list of titles. 
(e)  Periodically, after the adoption of these regulations, the personnel officer shall conduct a general review of the classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-6. - Interpretation of class specifications. 
The class specifications are descriptive and not restrictive. The use of a particular description as to duties, qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others of similar kind of quality. They are intended to indicate the kinds of positions which shall be allocated to the classes established. In a series of classes such as the police classes, the specifications for all classes should be reviewed as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-7. - Official copy of the position classification plan. 
The personnel officer shall be responsible for maintaining an official copy of the position classification plan. The official copy shall include a schematic list of class titles and class specifications plus all amendments thereto. A copy of the official plan shall be available for inspection by the public under reasonable conditions during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 7, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-8. - Amendments to the position classification plan. 
Each time a new class of positions should be established or a current class of positions abolished, the personnel officer shall make a study and submit his findings and recommendations to the director, department of administration, for processing in accordance with section 8-304 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 8, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-2-9. - Position classification plan in force. 
The position classification plan shall be considered a part of this section and have the same force and effect as these personnel regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 2, § 9, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE III. - PAY PLAN 

Sec. 16B-3-1. - New appointees. 
(a)  Generally, a new employee shall be paid the minimum rate of pay for his class. 
(b)  If the personnel officer determines that it is not possible to recruit qualified employees at the established entrance salary, after having been notified of the vacancy and having been allowed a reasonable time to recruit for the position, he may, at the request of the appointing authority, authorize the appointment of a qualified applicant at a higher step of the range, subject to approval by the director of administration and with the concurrence of the city manager, provided that all other employees in the same class of position in the same department are adjusted in salary to the same step not later than the beginning of the next quarter. If the salary of any employee in the same class in the same department is not adjusted in accordance with this section the appointing authority must obtain prior approval from the director of administration and with the concurrence of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 1, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, § 8, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-3-2. - Promotions. 
When an employee is promoted to a position in a higher class, his salary shall be increased to the minimum rate for the higher class. In the case of overlapping ranges and the employee to be promoted is at or above the minimum step of the class to which promoted, the promoted employee shall be increased to the dollar step immediately above his present salary which provides a minimum bi-weekly increase of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 89-106, § 1, 9-26-89) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 89-106, adopted Sept. 26, 1989, § 1 of which amended § 16B-3-2, reads as follows: "Section 2. This Ordinance shall be retroactive for those employees promoted or appointed after July 1, 1988, provided that at the time of the promotion or appointment, such employees were in a regular step as a result of the implementation of the pay plan in effect on July 1, 1987. 
Sec. 16B-3-2.1. - Promotional pay policy guidelines for public safety and general government pay programs. 
Promotional pay policy guidelines for the public safety and general government pay programs are: 
(1)  Public safety and general government employees that are selected for promotion will receive the greater of (a) a three percent pay increase of current salary for each pay grade that the new position exceeds the current position, limited to a maximum increase of ten percent or, (b) the minimum rate for the new position. 
(2)  This section is retroactive to April 29, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 97-129, § 2, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 01-88, § 1, 9-18-01) 
Editor's note— The provisions of Ord. No. 97-129, § 2, adopted Nov. 11, 1997, which amended Ch. 16B of the Code, have been included herein as § 16B-3-2.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16B-3-3. - Demotions. 
When an employee is demoted to a lower class position, he shall be paid at a rate which is within the approved range for the lower class position. The rate of pay shall be set by the director of administration with the recommendation of the department head concerned. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-4. - Reallocations downward. 
When an employee's position is reallocated to a lower class position and his present salary is above the maximum for the lower class, the employee shall be permitted to continue at his present rate of pay during period of incumbency (except in event of general service-wide reductions) but shall not be entitled to a salary increase. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-5. - Reinstated employees. 
A reinstated employee shall be paid at a salary rate within the approved salary range for the position in which he is reinstated. The rate of pay shall be set by the director of administration. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-6. - Part-time employment. 
When employment is on a part-time basis, only the proportionate part of the rate for the time actually employed shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 81-47, enacted June 9, 1981, deleted former § 16B-3-7 in its entirety, and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new § 16B-15-4. The deleted provisions pertained to overtime and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 7, enacted Aug. 17, 1971. 
Sec. 16B-3-8. - Administrative wage adjustment. 
(a)  The wages of each employee in Steps A through C of his job classification shall be reviewed annually by his immediate supervisor and appointing authority for the purpose of making recommendations for the following year. The wages of each employee in Steps D and E of his job classification shall be reviewed biennially for the purpose of making recommendations for the following year. All of the employee's personnel records, including attendance, tardiness, performance, and length of service shall be considered in making a wage recommendation, with major emphasis placed on the objective evaluation of services rendered. Continued development of personal skills through education and training, established as criteria by the department heads with the approval of the city manager, will be considered in making recommendations for pay increases. 
(b)  In all cases where wage increases are recommended, a certificate or a performance rating from the immediate supervisor, with the approval of the appointing authority, stating the reason for the recommendation, shall be submitted to the personnel officer. 
(c)  Departmental requests for wage adjustments shall be endorsed by the personnel officer and forwarded to the city manager via the director of administration for action. The city manager shall have the authority to approve or deny any request for a merit raise, based upon his review of length of service requirements and his evaluation of the employee's job performance record. 
(d)  The merit raise review contemplated by subsections (a), (b) and (c) herein shall be conducted annually for an effective pay raise in each year hereafter commencing July 1, 1988, for employees in Step A through G of their grade. The merit raise review contemplated by subsections (a), (b) and (c) herein shall be conducted biennially for an effective pay raise at two-year intervals commencing July 1, 1988, for employees in Steps H and I of their grade. All merit raises for employees in Steps A through G of their grade shall be effective at the beginning of the pay period in which the anniversary date of their appointment or promotion occurs. All merit raises for employees in Step H and I of their grade shall be effective at the beginning of the pay period in which the bi-anniversary date of their appointment or promotion occurs. 
(e)  When an employee is promoted to a higher class or pay grade, his promotional salary adjustment will be in accordance with section 16B-3-2. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 8, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 73-2, § 1, 1-2-73; Ord. No. 74-11, § 1, 1-2-74; Ord. No. 88-70, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 89-107, 9-26-89) 
Sec. 16B-3-8.1. - Tenure eligibility for promoted or individually reclassified employees; permanent anniversary or appointment date. 
(a)  In order to preserve equity amount all Columbus Consolidated Government employees with respect to their classifications and tenure, it is hereby ordained by the Council of Columbus, Georgia as follows: 
Effective July 1, 1998, the employee's original date of hiring will replace and supersede all anniversary dates whether established by date of employment, reclassification, promotion, or demotion as the date for implementation of any annual pay for performance increase for general government employees and public safety employees. 
Effective July 1, 1998, regular full-time employees are to be evaluated and rated at least once a year during the 30-day period prior to the date of hiring (anniversary). The evaluation will serve as a performance indicator to the employee and as a basis for performance increases. 
(b)  The tenure required for any merit increase shall not be deemed interrupted or negated by an individual reclassification or promotion within such tenure. 
(Ord. No. 74-49, 3-12-74; Ord. No. 89-108, 9-26-89; Ord. No. 97-95, 9-9-97) 
Sec. 16B-3-9. - Pay plans in effect. 
The pay plans in effect on the date of the adoption of the Charter shall remain in effect until modified in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and these regulations. When adopted, the pay plan for the government shall be considered a part of this article and have the same force and effect as these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 9, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-10. - Revision of pay plan. 
The personnel officer, when he deems it necessary, shall examine the pay plan for the purpose of revision and on the basis of conclusions reached through this examination, make recommendations for amendments as prescribed by section 8-304 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 10, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-3-11. - Adoption and amendment of pay plan. 
When approved as prescribed by section 8-304 of the Charter, such plan shall constitute the consolidated city's pay schedule for classes of positions in the merit system as prescribed by the Charter, section 8-302, for the ensuing fiscal year and thereafter until a new pay plan shall be adopted in the manner prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 3, § 11, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATIONS AND EXAMINATIONS 

Sec. 16B-4-1. - Announcements of examinations and position openings. 
All examinations, assembled or unassembled, for positions in the merit system shall be publicized by posting announcements in the office of the personnel officer on official bulletin boards, by utilizing communications media and the state employment service, and such means as the personnel officer deems advisable, to insure that all segments of the population are informed. The announcements shall specify the title and salary range of the class for which the examination is announced; the date, time, place, manner of making application; qualification requirements for admission to the tests; and other pertinent information. Assembled examinations shall be announced at least 15 days in advance of the closing date for the receipt of applications. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-2. - Application forms. 
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the personnel officer. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience, age and other pertinent information. All applications shall be signed by the person applying. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-2.1. - Criminal records background check. 
Based on the requirements of the job for which they are applying, all applicants for initial employment or a new position with the consolidated government shall consent in writing to a state and/or national criminal records background check and/or shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. The consolidated government will use this information consistent with federal law, and all appropriate notices required by such laws will be provided. 
(Ord. No. 03-58, § 1, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 12-13, § 2, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-4-3. - Employment requirements. 
All permanent positions shall be open to citizens of the United States and persons legally authorized to work in this country who meet the requirements as listed on the public announcement of the position. Such requirements may include but shall not be limited to the following factors: Experience, education, age, character, and physical condition. Applications will not be accepted for permanent full-time employment from any person less than 18 years of age, except high school graduates or equivalents and part-time student employees. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 3, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-4-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 16B-4-4, which pertained to residence requirements for merit system employees, was repealed by Ord. No. 86-30, enacted March 25, 1986. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 4, enacted Aug. 17, 1971. 
Sec. 16B-4-5. - Rejection of applications. 
The personnel officer may reject an application which indicates that the applicant is deficient in any or all of the requirements as specified in the public announcement of the examination. An applicant may also be rejected for the practice or attempted practice of fraud or deception in the completion of his application, or if his past record of employment is determined to be unsatisfactory by the personnel officer. Notice of rejection shall be mailed to the rejected applicant by the personnel officer, stating the reason therefor. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-6. - Open competitive examinations. 
Positions to be filled by recruitment from outside of the merit system may be filled through examinations open to the public. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled or continuously open and/or announced for specified dates and may include, but shall not be limited to rating of training and experience, written, oral, physical or performance tests or any combination of these as determined by the personnel officer. They may take into consideration such factors as education, experience, aptitude, knowledge, skill, character, physical fitness, or any other qualifications which in the judgment of the personnel officer enter into determination of the relative fitness of applicants. The personnel officer may require applicants to submit proof of their age, citizenship and military service at the time of the examination and shall keep a record of this information. Care shall be taken that the examinations shall not be prejudicial to any applicant, regardless of race, color, creed, sex or national origin. Furthermore, the examinations and other requirements shall be limited to the qualifications needed for the particular job in question. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-7. - Promotional examinations. 
Promotional examinations shall be open to all regular employees in the merit system who meet the necessary requirements as determined by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 7, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, § 9, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-4-8. - Method of rating. 
(a)  In all assembled examinations the minimum rating for the achievement of eligibility shall be established by the personnel officer. Such minimum rating shall apply also to the ratings of any part of the test. Candidates may be required to attain at least a minimum rating on each part of the test in order to receive a passing grade or to be rated on the remaining parts of the test. 
(b)  An honorably discharged disabled veteran of the armed forces of the United States who receives a passing mark on an open competitive examination shall be granted ten points additional in determining his order or rank on the eligible list for initial appointment only. To obtain disabled veteran's preference, an applicant shall have filed proof of military service, proof of disability, and receipt of honorable discharge on or before the date of the examination. No additional or other credit shall be given in any phase of the examination process or elsewhere. 
(c)  An honorably discharged veteran with no disability rating shall be granted five points additional in determining his order or rank on the eligible list for initial appointment only, and shall have filed proof of service and receipt of honorable discharge on or before the date of the examination. No additional or other credit shall be given in any phase of the examination process or elsewhere. 
(d)  If the number of applicants possessing the minimum qualifications as specified in the public announcement exceeds the number required for certification purposes, each applicant shall be given a final numerical grade if he qualifies on the examination for the position. If the number of applicants with the minimum qualifications does not exceed the number needed for certification purposes, the candidates may be rated as eligible or ineligible. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 8, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 74-77, § 1, 4-16-74) 
Sec. 16B-4-9. - Notification of examination results. 
Each person who takes an assembled examination shall be given written notice as to whether or not he qualified on such examination, and as to his relative standing on the list or of his failure to attain a place on the list. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 9, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-10. - Inspection of examination results. 
Each person taking an assembled examination shall be entitled to inspect his rating and examination papers, but the papers shall not be available to the general public. The personnel officer shall retain examination papers for a period of 60 days after notifying applicants of test results. Inspections shall be permitted only during regular business hours and shall be made in the office of the personnel officer. The inspection of test papers between the time of announcement and holding of another test for a similar class of positions shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 10, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-4-11. - Correction of ratings. 
Candidates for assembled examinations may appeal to the personnel officer for correction of their ratings upon presentation of proof that their examinations have been incorrectly rated. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 4, § 11, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE V. - ELIGIBLE LISTS 

Sec. 16B-5-1. - Statement of policy. 
Vacancies in the merit system shall be filled by unassembled or assembled examination unless the personnel officer rules that the vacancies should be filled by transfer, demotion or certification from preferred reemployment lists. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-2. - Reemployment lists. 
(a)  A permanent employee separated from the service by resignation may within a period of five years after date of separation at his request be placed on a general reemployment list for the class of positions from which he was separated provided he has successfully passed his probationary period. If the separation was by resignation, it must include a positive recommendation for reemployment from the employee's appointing authority at the time of resignation in order to make the employee eligible to be placed on the general reemployment list for the class involved. 
(b)  A permanent employee who has been laid off as a result of a reduction in force or the abolition of his position shall, upon his written request, be placed on a preferred reemployment list for the class of positions which he occupied at the time of separation. 
(c)  Names shall be placed on reemployment lists in order of performance ratings and length of service with the consolidated city and including prior service with the City of Columbus and/or Muscogee County, with emphasis placed on performance ratings. 
(d)  The eligibility of any person on a general reemployment list shall expire one year from the date on which his name was placed on the eligible list. Eligibility of any person on preferred reemployment lists shall expire one year from the date on which he becomes entitled to reemployment rights or when his name is certified for appointment in the class of positions from which he was laid off. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-3. - Promotional lists. 
Whenever possible, the personnel officer shall establish promotional lists from which vacancies under the merit system can be filled. Such lists shall consist of qualified eligibles from among the permanent employees of the consolidated city. These lists may be established on a service-wide or a department-wide basis as determined by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-4. - Employment lists. 
When it is impractical to establish adequate promotional lists, the personnel officer may establish employment lists consisting of persons who have successfully qualified on competitive examinations for the classes of positions involved. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-5. - Availability of eligibles. 
It shall be the responsibility of eligibles to notify the personnel officer in writing of any change of address or other change affecting his availability for employment. When an eligible submits a written statement restricting his availability for employment, his name may be withheld from all certification which does not meet the conditions which he has specified. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-6. - Duration of lists. 
Each eligible list shall remain in effect for a period of one year, unless a new examination is held and an eligible list established prior to the expiration of the one-year period, or the list is exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-5-7. - Removal of name from lists. 
Names may be removed from eligible lists for any of the reasons listed below: 
(a)  Refusal of three offers of appointment under conditions previously listed by the eligible as acceptable. 
(b)  Appointment through certification from such lists to fill a permanent position. 
(c)  Appointment through certification from the eligible list for another class at the same or higher compensation. In such case, at the request of the appointee, his name may be continued on any or all lists other than the one from which the appointment was made, for the remainder of the period of eligibility on such lists. 
(d)  Filing of a statement by the eligible that he is not willing to accept appointment. Such statement of unwillingness may be restricted to a limited period of time, or to geographic locations, or positions involving other conditions of employment, as specified. The name of the eligible shall then be treated as not available and shall be passed over in certification to fill the vacancy under the conditions specified as though such name did not appear on the list. Any eligible may renew his eligibility by filing a new statement as to the time, place or other conditions under which appointment will be accepted. 
(e)  Failure to respond, within the time specified in the notice, to any inquiry of the personnel officer or department head if satisfactory evidence is not furnished justifying such failure to respond. 
(f)  Failure to report for work after accepting appointment. 
(g)  Notice by postal authorities of their inability to locate eligible at last known address. 
(h)  Death of eligible. 
(i)  The discovery, upon review of eligibility, that the applicant would be subject to rejection under other provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 5, § 7, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE VI. - CERTIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT 

Sec. 16B-6-1. - Request for certification. 
(a)  All requisitions for the filling of vacancies shall be made on official forms as designated by the personnel officer. 
(b)  Applicants for employment will not be considered hired until the personnel action form (P1) placing the individual on the payroll has been approved by the personnel officer and the appointing authority is in receipt of the medical clearance from the city doctor. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 1, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 77-66, § 2, 6-7-77) 
Sec. 16B-6-2. - Anticipation of need. 
Insofar as possible, vacancies shall be anticipated sufficiently in advance to permit the personnel officer to establish an eligible list. If a new class is necessary, sufficient time shall be allowed for the preparation of a new class specification and to have the position classification and pay plans amended as provided by pertinent Charter provisions and these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-3. - Method of filling vacancies. 
Vacancies may be filled by transfer, demotion, or certification from preferred reemployment lists, promotional lists, general reemployment lists or employment lists. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-4. - Order of lists for certification. 
Usually eligibles shall be certified from lists in the order named as follows: Preferred reemployment list, promotional list, general reemployment list and employment list, unless for the good of the service the personnel officer elects to change the order. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-5. - Number of names to be certified. 
The personnel officer shall certify the top three names from an eligible list as provided in section 16B-6-4 above. If more than one vacancy exists, the number certified shall be equal to the number of vacancies plus two. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-6. - Appropriate eligible lists. 
Certification shall ordinarily be made from a list established for the particular class in which the vacancy exists. However, if no such list exists or the list contains an insufficient number of eligibles for certification purposes, the personnel officer may at his discretion certify names from an appropriate eligible list if such a list is available. Such a list shall be for a class of the same or higher pay level with the qualification requirements equal to or superior to the class in which the vacancy exists. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-7. - Temporary appointments. 
(a)  Temporary appointments for short term employment in positions that will not continue longer than six months in any 12-month period shall be made from eligible lists, if such lists exist. If no list exists or if certification from lists is impracticable because of nonavailability of eligibles for temporary work, the personnel officer may authorize the appointing authority to recommend persons of his own choosing. The personnel officer will review the recommended applicants and certify those meeting at least the minimum qualifications established for the class of position to the appointing authority for appointment. 
(b)  Temporary appointment may be made to fill vacant higher budgeted positions vacated by employees on sick leave by lower grade employees, without pay for the higher position, for periods of time not to exceed 90 consecutive calendar days during any 12 month period. If it should become necessary to retain an employee over 90 consecutive calendar days in the higher budgeted position, action will be taken to start paying the lower grade employee on the first day following the completion of the 90 days and he will continue to receive the higher rate until the incumbent returns to duty. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 7, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 74-78, § 1, 4-16-74; Ord. No. 75-20, § 10, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-6-8. - Emergency appointments. 
When an emergency involving the serious impairment of the public business makes it impossible to fill a position under the merit system by the normal procedure, the appointing authority, subject to the approval of the personnel officer, may appoint any qualified person to such position in order to prevent stoppage of public business or loss, or serious inconvenience to the public. Any such person shall be employed only during such emergency and for a period not to exceed 30 days. A vacancy of which the appointing authority has had a reasonable notice, or an employment condition of which he had, or might with due diligence have had, previous knowledge, shall not be considered an emergency under this section. Within ten days of the date of an emergency, the appointing authority involved shall justify the emergency in writing to the satisfaction of the personnel officer. Emergencies which may be reasonably anticipated by an appointing authority shall be justified in writing in advance to the satisfaction of the personnel officer. Improper emergency appointments within the classified service shall be terminated by the personnel officer as he deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 8, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-9. - Provisional appointments. 
(a)  An appointing authority, subject to the certification by the personnel officer that the applicant meets the minimum qualifications established for the class of position, may make a provisional appointment of an applicant to a position in a class for which no appropriate eligibility lists exists. 
(b)  A provisional appointment shall continue only until an appropriate eligible list may be established and certification made therefrom. 
(c)  In no event shall a provisional appointment continue for more than 90 days in any 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 9, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, § 11, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 16B-6-10. - Limited term appointments. 
Vacancies created by a military leave of absence without pay shall be filled by a limited term appointment by certification from an eligible list in the same manner as is used for other appointments. A person holding a limited term appointment may be terminated when the person he is replacing returns to the position. Transfer from limited term to permanent status may be made if the person being replaced fails to return on the termination of his leave. Except for the limited nature of their status, employees holding limited term appointments shall have the same rights and privileges as permanent employees. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 10, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-6-11. - Part-time positions. 
The personnel officer, at his discretion, may authorize the filling of part-time positions involving less than 20 hours work a week without regard to the certification provisions included in this regulation. Persons employed under such conditions shall not achieve permanent status except as provided elsewhere in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 11, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 72-75, 5-2-72) 
Sec. 16B-6-12. - Interpretation. 
The personnel officer is authorized to make any necessary administrative interpretations concerning certification and appointment matters not inconsistent with these personnel regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 6, § 12, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE VII. - PROMOTIONS, TRANSFERS, DEMOTIONS 

Sec. 16B-7-1. - Policy. 
Vacancies in higher positions in the merit system shall be filled as far as practicable by promotion from lower classes. To accomplish this purpose, closed examinations may be held. When the personnel officer determines that there is an insufficient number of well qualified eligibles within the service, he may direct that an open competitive examination be held. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-2. - Political or partisan endorsement prohibited. 
No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement for promotions; only merit and fitness for promotion shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-3. - Promotional examinations. 
The personnel officer shall conduct competitive promotional examinations in accordance with these regulations. In competitive promotional examinations, the personnel officer shall admit to the examination all employees who meet the published qualification requirements. In unassembled examinations, he may establish appropriate rating schedules which may credit, as appropriate, the experience, training and performance ratings of the applicants. Care shall be taken that the examinations shall not be prejudicial to any applicant, regardless of race, color, creed, sex or national origin. Furthermore, the examinations and other requirements shall be limited to the qualifications needed for the particular job in question. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-4. - Intra-departmental transfers. 
The appropriate department head may, at any time, transfer an employee under his jurisdiction from one position to another in the same class in the same department. An intra-departmental transfer of an employee to a position of another class shall be made only with the approval of the personnel officer and only between classes within the same pay range. The personnel officer shall be notified of such changes in assignments. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-5. - Inter-departmental transfers. 
A transfer of an employee from one department to another shall have the approval of both appointing authorities concerned and the personnel officer. Requests for such transfer shall show how the employee concerned meets the qualification requirements of the class to which the transfer is proposed. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-6. - Pay grade after transfer. 
An employee who is transferred shall continue at his same pay rate except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 6, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-7. - Voluntary demotions. 
An employee may be demoted at his own request to a vacant position in a lower class, subject to the approval of the personnel officer. The personnel officer shall determine whether the employee is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities of the lower class of positions. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 7, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-7-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-139, adopted Dec. 16, 1997, repealed former § 16B-7-8 of the Code, which pertained to pay grade after voluntary demotion and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 7, § 8, adopted Aug. 17, 1971. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROBATIONARY PERIOD 

Sec. 16B-8-1. - Objective. 
The probationary period shall be regarded as an integral part of the examination process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his position, and for rejecting any employee whose performance is not satisfactory. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-8-2. - Duration. 
The probation period for general government employees shall be six months in duration which may be extended at the discretion of the appropriate department head for up to six additional months; provided however, that the probationary period for all sworn officers of the department of public safety shall be for 18 months in duration with no further extensions. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 80-59, § 1, 5-13-80; Ord. No. 87-23, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 12-13, § 4, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-8-3. - Extension of time. 
The personnel officer may, upon the request of the appointing authority made not later than 20 days before the expiration of the probationary period, extend the duration of such period and notify the employee. No extension shall be allowed which would make the total probationary period longer than one year; provided however, that the total probationary period for all sworn officers of the department of public safety shall not be more than 18 months. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 16B-8-4. - Promotional appointments. 
The probationary period shall be used in connection with promotional appointments in the same manner as it is used for original entrance appointments. If a person is removed during his probationary period following a promotion, he shall be entitled to reemployment rights in his former class. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-8-5. - Interruption of probationary period. 
If an employee is laid off during a probationary period and his services have been satisfactory and he is subsequently reappointed in the same department from the same eligible list, he shall be given credit for the portion of the probationary period completed before he was laid off. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-8-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former § 16B-8-6, which pertained to dismissal during probationary period and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 6, adopted Aug. 17, 1971. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 16B-8-7. - Probationary period reports. 
At least 20 working days prior to the expiration of the employee's probationary period, the appointing authority shall notify the personnel officer in writing whether or not the employee has satisfactorily completed his probationary period. Failure to send such a notice within ten working days of the expiration date of the probationary period shall automatically grant the employee permanent status in the position. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 7, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-8-8. - Placement of dismissed employee on appropriate list. 
If an employee is removed from his position during or at the end of his probationary period and the personnel officer determines that he is suitable for appointment to another position, his name may be restored to the list from which it was certified. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 8, § 8, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE IX. - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

Sec. 16B-9-1. - Objective. 
The director of human resources shall prepare and administer a system for evaluating the work performance of all employees in the classified service. The purpose of the employee performance evaluation shall be primarily to inform employees how well they are performing their work and how they can improve their work performance. The performance evaluation may also be used in determining pay grade or step reclassification; as a factor in determining order of lay-off; as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer or dismissal; and for such other purposes as are allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 1, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-2. - Period of evaluation. 
On original appointment or on promotions, as a minimum, all classified employees, except temporary workers, shall be evaluated at least 30 days prior to the end of their probationary period. All employees shall be evaluated annually thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-3. - Evaluation. 
An annual evaluation of each classified employee of the consolidated government shall be prepared by an appropriate supervisor or appointing authority, reviewed by the appropriate division head, department head and/or appointing authority, and forwarded to the human resources department for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-4. - Review with employee. 
The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated. If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, he may submit, within ten days following the conference with his supervisor, a written statement, which shall be forwarded to the human resources director and attached to the evaluation form. Assistance in writing this statement shall be given to the employee, upon his request, by the department in which the employee is located. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 4, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-5. - Performance evaluations confidential 
Performance evaluations will be maintained in the custody of the human resources director or his representative and may be used by appropriate consolidated government staff for all legitimate employer's purposes including personnel review board proceedings. The employee may at all times have access to his or her own evaluations. Except as specified above, all governmental officials handling evaluations shall maintain their confidentiality unless required by state or federal law to disclose the same. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 5, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-6. - Changes in evaluation. 
If for any reason an appointing authority shall request a revision of the performance evaluation form after it has been officially submitted to the human resources director, such request shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the reasons for the request. The revised evaluation, when approved by the human resources director, shall become the official performance evaluation. The provisions of section 16B-9-4 will apply to any revised evaluation prepared pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 9, § 6, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 3-13-12) 
Sec. 16B-9-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-13, § 6, adopted Mar. 13, 2012, repealed § 16B-9-7, which pertained to pay for performance plan for public safety employees and derived from Ord. No. 97-88, adopted 8-26-97. 
ARTICLE X. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 16B-10-01. - Scope of provisions. 
An employee may be separated from the service of the consolidated city by any one of the eight different methods as described below. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-10-1. - Resignation. 
To resign in good standing an employee should give, in writing, his division head, department head or appointing authority at least 14 calendar days' prior notice. Normally, failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service record of the employee, shall result in a denial of reemployment rights and shall result in a reduction of accumulated annual leave by one day for each calendar day less than the required 14 days' notice. However, the department head or appointing authority, with the approval of the personnel officer, may exempt from any or all of these penalties an employee who has given less than the required notice if, in his judgment, exceptional circumstances warrant such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-10-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former § 16B-10-2, which pertained to dismissal for unauthorized absences and derived from Ord. No. 88-69, § 1, adopted June 14, 1988. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 16B-10-3. - Lay-offs. 
(a)  Any involuntary separation not involving delinquency, misconduct or inefficiency, shall be considered a lay-off. 
(b)  When, for any reason, it becomes necessary to reduce the working force in a department or division, employees shall be laid off on the basis of the following (4) factors: Type of appointment, length of service in class, length of service with the consolidated city and the City of Columbus and/or Muscogee County, and the average performance rating for the last three years of service or for the entire period if it is less than three years. 
(c)  If it becomes necessary to lay off a permanent employee, after all part-time, temporary and permanent part-time employees have been laid off, he shall be offered a demotion to a lower class if a vacancy exists and he is qualified to fill the position in the lower class involved. The administration, notwithstanding consideration of employee seniority, must maintain the efficient operation of the consolidated government. 
(d)  Prior to a reduction in force, the names and job titles of any and all permanent employees scheduled for lay-off shall be submitted to the personnel officer for approval and until he has approved and confirmed the names submitted for lay-off, no layoff shall be consummated. 
(e)  Permanent employees to be laid off shall be notified in writing by the personnel officer at least 14 calendar days prior to the effective day of the lay-off. 
(f)  The abolishing of positions within the position classification plan or the consolidated government shall not be considered as a layoff under this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 75-20, § 12, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 88-69, §§ 2, 3, 6-14-88) 
Sec. 16B-10-4. - Disability. 
An appointing authority may direct any employee under his jurisdiction to be examined by a physician employed by the consolidated city. When a disability of any kind is discovered which impairs the effectiveness of an employee or makes his continuance on the job a danger to himself or others, the following action shall be taken: 
(a)  If the disability is correctable, the employee shall be allowed a specified time as determined by the personnel officer to have it corrected. If he fails to take steps to have the disability corrected within this specified time, he shall be subject to disciplinary action or lay-off. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the appointing authority, subject to the approval of the personnel officer, shall: 
(1)  Attempt to place the employee in another position which he can perform satisfactorily. 
(2)  If that cannot be accomplished successfully, the appointing authority shall take steps to separate the employee from the consolidated city service through retirement or lay-off. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-10-5. - Loss of job requirements. 
Any employee who is unable to do his job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement, shall be separated by a lay-off. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 5, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-10-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former § 16B-10-6, which pertained to dismissals and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 6, adopted Aug. 17, 1971; Ord. No. 71-287, § 2, adopted Nov. 2, 1971; and Ord. No. 88-69, § 4, adopted June 14, 1988. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 16B-10-7. - Death. 
When a permanent employee dies while in the merit system of the consolidated city, his beneficiary shall be eligible to receive his accumulated annual leave. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 7, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-10-8. - Retirement. 
Except as provided in retirement ordinances, no employee shall continue in service beyond his 70th birthday. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 10, § 8, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 80-29, § 1, 4-1-80) 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former Art. XI of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. XI, §§ 16B-11-1—16B-11-3, pertained to disciplinary action and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 11, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 17, 1971; Ord. No. 81-61, § 1, adopted June 25, 1981; and Ord. No. 91-18, adopted March 19, 1991. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 

Secs. 16B-11-1—16B-11-3. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TRAINING AND WELFARE ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 16B-12-1. - Employee development. 
It shall be the responsibility of the personnel officer to cooperate with appointing authorities, employees and others to foster and promote programs of training for the consolidated city service and in-service training of employees for the purposes of improving the quality of personal services rendered to the consolidated city and of aiding employees to equip themselves for advancement in the service. Opportunities for training in the field of human relations, for the purpose of improving the morale and efficiency of departments of the government. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 12, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-12-2. - Administration of employee development program. 
The personnel officer shall: 
(a)  Recommend to appointing authorities, as appropriate, standards for training programs and programs for approval as meeting such standards; 
(b)  See that training is carried out as approved and have prepared certificates or other forms of recognition for persons who satisfactorily complete approved courses and programs; 
(c)  Assist appointing authorities in developing and conducting training to meet the specific needs of their departments and in developing and utilizing other techniques for increasing employee efficiency; 
(d)  Develop and conduct supervisory and management training and other types of training and employee development programs common to all departments; 
(e)  Assist appointing authorities in establishing standards of performance and procedures for evaluating employee efficiency; 
(f)  Make available information concerning job requirements and training opportunities in order to assist employees in increasing their efficiency in their present positions, and in preparing themselves for promotions to higher positions in the consolidated city; 
(g)  Keep a record of all approved training programs and courses and a record of employees who successfully complete such courses and programs. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 12, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-12-3. - Welfare program. 
The personnel officer may cooperate with appointing authorities, employees and others to promote measures directed toward more sanitary, safe and healthful working conditions; toward affording better facilities for recreation; toward greater security and economic advantage, including the development of group insurance and credit union facilities; and toward any other means of bettering the conditions and improving the morale of the consolidated city employees. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 12, § 3, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE XIII. - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

Sec. 16B-13-1. - Personnel transactions. 
All appointments, separations and other personnel transactions shall be made on forms designated by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 13, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-13-2. - Public inspection. 
The following information relative to employees and former employees is available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with such procedures as the personnel officer may prescribe: Name, class title and salary, and eligible lists. Examination records and performance rating reports are accessible only to the appointing authority concerned, personnel officer, personnel review board and the employee involved. Other personnel information may be made available for official purposes at the discretion of the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 13, § 2, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 02-39, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 16B-13-3. - Destruction of records. 
Eligible lists and employee service records shall be kept for five years after termination of employment either in the original or microfilm copies. All other records, including correspondence, applications and examinations may be destroyed after one year, or as otherwise specified by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 13, § 3, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-13-4. - Reports. 
The director of administration shall submit a written report to the personnel review board and the council monthly. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 13, § 4, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-13-5. - Attendance records. 
Regular attendance reports shall be prepared and submitted by each department and agency of the consolidated city in the merit system as required by the director of administration. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 13, § 5, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-92, § 1, adopted October 24, 2000, repealed in its entirety former Art. XIV, §§ 16B-14-1—16B-14-3, which pertained to certification of payrolls and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 14, §§ 1—3, adopted August 17, 1971. § 2 of Ord. No. 00-92 adopted Human Resources Policy Number 220-302, Pay Process Policy , dated November 1, 2000, the official copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 

Secs. 16B-14-1—16B-14-3. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 16B-15-1. - Hours of work. 
The established work week for all full-time employees in the classified service shall be not less than 40 hours, and shall be the same for all persons occupying full-time positions in the same class under the same conditions. The work schedule for each department shall be established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-2. - Attendance. 
Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all persons in his department and shall keep complete attendance records including vacation, sick, over time, etc. Records of attendance shall be reported as provided in sections 16B-13-1 through 16B-13-5. Leave shall be authorized in units of days and hours only. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-3. - Holidays. 
The following days are designated as regular holidays for employees in the classified service: 
New Year's Day, January 1 
Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday, the third Monday in January 
Memorial Day, the last Monday in May 
Independence Day, July 4 
Labor Day, the first Monday in September 
Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday and the Friday following in November 
Christmas Day, December 25 
Other days may be declared holidays by the city council at its discretion. Overtime pay shall be granted for work done on holidays under the same conditions as specified in section 16B-15-4 below. Whenever a holiday (with the exception of December 25 and January 1) falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered a holiday. Whenever December 25 and January 1 fall on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered a holiday. Whenever December 25 and January 1 fall on Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered a holiday. Holidays which occur during annual leave shall not be charged against annual leave. Full-time hourly workers shall be paid for holidays on the basis of an eight-hour day. Part-time workers will not be paid for holidays not worked. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 72-90, §§ 1—4, 5-23-72; Ord. No. 73-152, § 1, 11-13-73; Ord. No. 82-86, 12-7-82; Ord. No. 86-5, 1-14-86) 
Sec. 16B-15-4. - Overtime and compensatory time policy. 
Human Resources Policy Number 220-201, Overtime and Compensatory Time Policy, dated November 1, 1998 is adopted. The official copy of said policy shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-91, § 2, 9-22-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-91, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 1998, repealed former § 16B-15-4 of the Code, which pertained to overtime and derived from Ord. No. 81-47, § 1, adopted June 9, 1981. Section 2 of Ord. No. 98-91 enacted new provisions which have been included herein as § 16B-15-4 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16B-15-5. - Annual leave (vacation). 
(a)  Generally. Vacations shall be granted only in compliance with the following: 
(1)  All city officials and permanent employees with less than ten years of service shall accrue vacation leave at the rate of ten fifty-seconds ( 10/52 ) of a day for each five days of paid service at straight time, i.e., a maximum of ten working days per year. 
(2)  All city officials and permanent employees with ten or more years of service shall accrue vacation leave at the rate of fifteen fifty-seconds ( 15/52 ) of a day for each five days of paid service at straight time, i.e., a maximum of 15 working days per year. 
(3)  All city officials and permanent employees with 15 years of service or more shall accrue vacation leave at the rate of twenty fifty-seconds ( 20/52 ) of a day for each five days of paid service at straight time, i.e., a maximum of 20 working days per year. 
(4)  Vacation leave may be accumulated to a maximum of 20 working days for employees with less than 15 years of service, and 30 working days for employees with 15 or more years of service. At the end of each leave year all vacation leave days above the maximum allowable accumulation will be added to the catastrophic sick leave bank until such bank reaches it maximum accrual. 
(5)  The heads of departments shall schedule vacations in accordance with the needs of their respective departments and budgetary limitations on replacement help. 
(6)  Employees shall not be permitted to exchange vacations for cash payment. 
(7)  Annual leave shall be charged by the hour for any portion of a work day but not less than 15 minute increments of an hour. 
(8)  Whenever any employee receives a paid military leave for any period in excess of ten working days, the paid vacation provided for by this section shall be reduced one day of each day of paid military leave in excess of ten working days. 
(9)  Any city official or employee entitled to a vacation with pay who terminates his employment, or whose employment is terminated, retires, enters the armed forces, or is laid off prior to taking his vacation, shall receive pay for all unused vacation time that he has earned. In the event a city official or employee dies, the beneficiary named for his insurance benefits shall be paid for all unused vacation time that he has earned. 
(b)  Crediting of annual leave. On the effective date of these regulations, all city officials and employees on the payroll shall be credited with all earned and unused annual leave, provided that the total amount credited does not exceed twice the amount the employee is permitted to earn in a year. City officials and employees who shall have been employed less than one year on the effective date of these regulations shall be credited with the number of days vacation time that they would have earned if these regulations had been in effect when they were employed. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 5, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 72-75, 5-2-72; Ord. No. 72-255, § 1, 12-26-72; Ord. No. 81-57, § 1, 6-25-81; Ord. No. 09-19, § 1, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 15-35, § 1, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 18-29, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 16B-15-6. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Rate of leave. All city officials and permanent employees of the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia, shall be entitled to sick leave with full pay computed on the basis on one-fourth day for each five work days of paid service. 
(1)  Sick leave may be accumulated to an amount based upon the following stipulations: 
The base accumulation shall be 30 working days. 
Any sick leave used shall be from the base 30 days until the amount shall have been expended. 
(2)  Accumulation above 30 days shall be handled in the following manner: 
When a city official or an employee shall have accumulated 30 days of sick leave by the end of the last pay period in November, he may be paid in cash each year by December 25 for one-fourth of the accumulated sick leave beyond the base 30 days, and the other three-fourths above the 30 days shall be added to his sick leave reserve accumulation until a maximum of 60 days shall be attained in the reserve accumulation. At the end of each leave year all sick leave days above the maximum allowable reserve accumulation will be added to the catastrophic sick leave bank until a maximum of 120 days shall be attained. 
No charge shall be made against the above sick leave reserve accumulation until the base accumulation of 30 days has been exhausted, and until a valid medical certificate has been presented as to the nature of the employee's illness. 
(3)  In cases of emergency, city officials and employees who, because of protracted illness, shall have used all accumulated sick leave and vacation leave may be advanced sick leave by the director of administration. To assure as much uniformity as possible among the various city departments, requests for advanced sick leave shall be addressed by the appropriate department head to the personnel officer. In requesting an advance of sick leave, the department head shall submit the following facts for the consideration of the personnel officer: 
The length of consolidated service of the employee, including prior service with the City of Columbus and/or Muscogee County. 
The classification of the employee's position. 
The sick leave record of the employee for the current and for the four preceding calendar years. 
A medical certificate which shall include the nature of the illness, the prognosis and the probable date when the employee will return to work. 
The personnel officer, upon investigation, shall make his recommendation to the director of administration. No advance of sick leave may be granted until an employee has completed at least five years of full-time work service. If approved, such extension shall be on the basis of one day at full pay for each completed year of full-time work service. In no case shall advance sick leave exceed 30 days at full pay. This sick leave shall be charged against future sick leave accruing to the employee and vacation leave, exclusive of one week of vacation each year. If city officials or employee's employment is terminated before the advanced sick leave has been repaid, deduction of one day's pay, based on the rate of pay at the time of termination, for each day advanced to him shall be made from the final pay or other sum due him or her. 
(4)  Sick leave shall be charged by the hour for any portion of a work day but not less than 15 minute increments of an hour. 
(5)  A city official or an employee who leaves the service of the government and is reemployed within 90 days and upon compliance with regulations then in force shall be credited with all unused and unpaid-for sick leave not to exceed 30 days. 
(6)  Whenever a city official or employee of the government is granted a leave of absence without pay and returns to the service of the city at the conclusion of said leave, or has been laid off under the provisions of the merit system, upon reinstatement he shall be credited with all sick leave standing to his credit on the effective date of the beginning of his leave of absence or layoff. The city official or employee will not accrue sick leave during a leave of absence without pay or a layoff. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reason for granting sick leave. A city official or employee eligible for sick leave with pay shall be granted such leave by the head of his department for the following reasons: 
(1)  Personal illness, illness in connection with childbirth, injury, or absence necessitated by exposure to contagious disease so that the health of fellow employees may be endangered by attendance on duty. 
(2)  Injury or illness of a member of the employee's family that requires the employee's personal care and attendance. 
An employee's family is defined as: 
(A)  Individuals related to each other by blood, marriage, or legal adoption as spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, father-in-law, and mother-in-law, grandparent, or grandchild, or 
(B)  Another relative who has been in a parent-child relationship to the employee, or 
(C)  Legal dependents of the employee as shown on the employee's most recent federal income tax return. 
(3)  Death of a member of the employee's family, as defined in subparagraph (b) (2) above, plus grandparents (both natural and in-law), grandchildren, brothers-in-law, and sisters-in-law, shall entitle an employee to three days' leave. 
(c)  Crediting of accumulated sick leave. All city officials and employees of the government shall be credited with all accumulated sick leave upon the effective date of these regulations. All amounts up to and including 30 days will be credited to the base fund. All amounts in excess of 30 days, not to exceed 60 days, will be credited to the reserve fund. Cash payments will not be made on any amount until December, 1972. 
(d)  Certification by physician. An acceptable medical certificate signed by a licensed physician will be required of an employee by his department head to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
(1)  Any period of absence consisting of more than five consecutive working days. 
(2)  To support a request for sick leave during annual leave. 
(3)  Leave of any duration if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate will be required. 
(e)  Request for sick leave. To receive compensation while absent on sick leave, the employee shall notify the proper authority—immediate superior, division head or department head—as designated by the department head and within the time limit established by the appropriate department head. Each department head will notify the personnel officer in writing of the rules, as outlined above, established for his department. If such rules are changed or modified, the personnel officer shall be notified in writing. 
(f)  Catastrophic sick leave. When an employee with a major illness or injury exhausts all available leave, to include sick, vacation and compensatory time, and remains unable to return to work as certified by a licensed physician, such employee may be paid from any accrued leave time in their catastrophic sick leave bank. 
(1)  To receive benefits from their catastrophic sick leave bank employees must present medical certification to the human resources director that they are unable to return to work due to their own illness or injury. 
(2)  A catastrophic illness or injury is usually life threatening and may leave significant residual disability or involve lengthy recovery and/or rehabilitation periods, and is expected to incapacitate the employee for an extended period of time or required the employee to receive care from a hospice or similar palliative care provider. Examples of illness or injury that qualifies for catastrophic sick leave include heart attacks, heart conditions requiring heart bypass or valve operations, congestive heart failure, most cancers, back conditions requiring extensive therapy or surgical procedures, strokes, severe respiratory conditions, spinal injuries, emphysema, severe arthritis, severe nervous disorders, and injuries caused by serious accidents. 
(3)  If the human resources director determines that the injury or illness does not qualify for catastrophic sick leave benefits the employee may appeal that determination through the human resources director to the city manager. The human resources director will provide the employee leave request and all supporting documentation to the city manager for review. The decision of the city manager will be communicated to the employee by the human resources director and is final. 
(4)  When employees are paid from their catastrophic sick leave bank their department is relieved of the payroll charge and may hire a temporary replacement for the employee on catastrophic leave. 
(5)  Balances held in the catastrophic sick leave bank shall be treated the same as sick leave for incidents involving leave of absence, separation, reinstatement and reemployment. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 6, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 72-75, 5-2-72; Ord. No. 72-255, §§ 2—5, 12-26-72; Ord. No. 80-30, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 09-19, §§ 2, 3, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 15-35, § 2, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 17-57, § 1, 10-31-17; Ord. No. 18-29, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 16B-15-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-65, § 1, adopted August 12, 2003, repealed former § 16B-15-7, which pertained to military leave, and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 7, adopted August 17, 1971, Ord. No. 73-148, § 1, adopted November 6, 1973, and Ord. No. 87-144, adopted October 27, 1987. Section 2 of Ord. No. 03-65 adopted Human Resources Policy Number 220-401, Military Leave Policy, dated August 20, 2003. The official copy of said policy is maintained in the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 16B-15-8. - Civil leave. 
An employee shall be given time off without loss of pay when performing jury duty or when subpoenaed to appear before a court, public body or commission in connection with consolidated city business. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 8, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 73-148, § 2, 11-6-73; Ord. No. 80-32, § 1, 4-1-80) 
Sec. 16B-15-9. - Educational leave. 
A full-time permanent employee may be given educational leave with pay for the purpose of taking courses directly related to his work as determined by the appropriate department head and the personnel officer. Requests for such leave must be approved in advance by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 9, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-10. - Leave without pay. 
An employee may be granted leave without pay for a period not to exceed six months when it is in the best interest of the government. The request will be considered when the records indicate the employee to be of more than average value to the government, and where it is desirable to retain the employee even at some sacrifice. When the leave without pay expires, the employee shall be reinstated to the position vacated if the position still exists, or to some other position in the same class if the position no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 10, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-11. - Absence without leave. 
An absence of an employee from duty, including any absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be without pay and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action. In the absence of disciplinary action, an employee who absents himself for three consecutive days without leave shall be deemed to have resigned. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 11, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-12. - Workmen's Compensation. 
(a)  An employee who is temporarily disabled because of an injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his work shall be covered by the provisions of the state Workmen's Compensation Act. Sick or annual leave will accrue on the same basis as if the employee were in work status. 
(b)  An employee receiving Workmen's Compensation payments who is also in a sick and/or annual leave status shall be paid the difference between such payments and his regular rate of pay. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 15, § 12, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-15-13. - Time off for voting. 
Employees are hereby granted leave of one hour on election days to vote. Such time off shall be between 4:00 o'clock and 5:00 o'clock on election days with staggered periods of one hour off for employees in critical services. 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 1, 8-1-72) 
Sec. 16B-15-14. - Hazardous duty injury leave. 
Employees who are injured on the job may be granted hazardous duty injury leave for a period up to 90 calendar days from the date of injury for each new separate work injury when injuries are incurred under certain conditions of extraordinary hazardous duty as confirmed by the fire chief, police chief or warden of CCI. After all hazardous duty injury leave is used, an employee may elect to use his sick leave accrual at full charge or receive remaining workmen's compensation payments if he is still disabled. 
(a)  Eligibility for hazardous duty injury leave. In order for an employee to receive hazardous duty injury leave for an injury, he must have been injured in the line of duty through no negligence of his own while engaged in one of the following extraordinary hazardous activities: 
(1)  Answering an alarm or a call for help, or 
(2)  Directly engaged in extinguishing a fire, or 
(3)  Directly attempting to make an arrest, to apprehend a law violator, to aid an individual threatened with bodily harm, or to stop a crime in progress. 
(4)  Directly engaged in the direction and control of vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic within the streets and rights-of-way of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Contested injuries. Charges may be made against a sick leave accrual, if any, in any case in which the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia is contesting that the injury occurred on the job and under the conditions of eligibility as outlined above. In the event such contested action is found in favor of the employee, sick leave so charged shall be credited to the employee's sick leave balance. In the event an employee is found not to be entitled to hazardous duty injury leave but is found to be entitled to workmen's compensation payments, the employee may elect to continue to receive his full compensation with the difference between workmen's compensation payments and his full pay being charged to his sick leave or vacation leave accruals. In the event an employee is found not to be entitled to either hazardous duty injury leave or workmen's compensation payments, then he shall be eligible to utilize sick leave or vacation leave accruals. 
(c)  Medical proofs. In order to limit the obligation of the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia for new and separate injury, the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia may require an employee to furnish medical proof or submit to medical examination by the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia at its expense to determine whether such injury is a new and separate injury or an aggravation of a former injury received while in the service of the consolidated government, Columbus, Georgia. 
(d)  Hazardous duty injury leave will be fully credited toward meeting workmen's compensation claims. 
(Ord. No. 73-33, § 1, 3-13-73; Ord. No. 78-48, 5-2-78; Ord. No. 80-99, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-80) 
Sec. 16B-15-15. - Donating vacation time; terminal illness. 
In cases where city employees voluntarily identify themselves as unable to perform the essential functions of their job due to a terminal illness, grievous injury or other serious medical conditions and have exhausted all paid leave benefits and are therefore subject to layoff, any city employee that has such vacation time, may voluntarily and irrevocably donate their own vacation time to the ill employee by written notification to the personnel officer, who will credit the ill employee with the donated time upon approval of the department head and concurrence of the director of administration. No layoff shall be effected as long as such credited vacation time has been made available. 
(Ord. No. 88-132, 12-27-88; Ord. No. 94-33, § 1, 4-19-94) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-132, adopted Dec. 27, 1988, amended Art. XV of Ch. 16B by adding provisions thereto. Such provisions were included herein by the editor as § 16B-15-15. 
ARTICLE XVI. - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES AND ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRATUITIES 

Sec. 16B-16-1. - Limitations on political activity. 
No person holding a position in the merit system shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive in any manner or be concerned with soliciting or receiving any assistance or subscriptions or contributions for any political purpose or participation of any form of political activity whatsoever, other than to express privately his rights as a citizen and to cast his vote at any election. No employee in the merit system shall be a member of any national, state or local committee of a political party, or officer or member of a committee of a partisan political club, or shall take part in any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 16, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-16-2. - General statement on political activities. 
Any group of persons which opposes another group in matters of governmental principles or policies, or which contends for governmental power is a political party. Since the scope of governmental activity is constantly changing, a question which is not a political issue at one time may assume a political aspect at another. The merits of a particular cause or issue are immaterial. If politics are involved, active participation by employees of the consolidated city is prohibited. An employee may participate in a discussion where no political issue is involved or make an address or any moral or ethical subject, but when two or more parties or factions become engaged in a contest for rival or antagonistic measures or policies of governmental control or regulation, a political issue is created. 
All employees in the merit system are subject to the prohibition against political activity, including emergency and temporary employees, employees on leave of absence without pay, part-time employees and persons employed on an intermittent basis. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 16, § 2, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-16-3. - Detailed description of prohibited and permissible political activity. 
The activities described below are intended to indicate the kinds of activities which are prohibited. They are not to be construed as all-inclusive. 
(a)  Conventions: Candidacy for or service as a delegate, alternate or proxy in any political convention or service as an officer or employee thereof is prohibited. Attendance merely as a spectator is permissible, but the employee so attending must not take any part in the convention or in the deliberations or proceedings of any of its committees and must refrain from any public display of partisanship or obtrusive demonstration or interference. 
(b)  Primaries, caucuses: An employee may sign a petition to hold a primary, may attend a primary meeting, mass convention, caucus and the like, and may cast his vote on any question presented, but he may not pass this point in participating in its deliberations. He may not act as an officer of the meeting, convention or caucus, may not address it, make motions, prepare or assist in preparing resolutions, assume to represent others or take any prominent part therein. 
(c)  Committees: Service on or for any political committee or similar organization is prohibited. An employee may attend as a spectator any meeting of a political committee to which the general public is admitted, but must refrain from activity as indicated in the preceding paragraphs. 
(d)  Clubs and organizations: Employees may be members of political clubs, but it is improper for them to be active in organizing such a club, to be officers of the club, or members or officers of any of its committees or to act as such, or to address a political club. Service as a delegate from such a club to a league of political clubs or service as an officer or representative of a political club is prohibited, as is service as a delegate or representative of such a club to or in any other organization. In other words, an employee may become a member of a political club but may not take an active part in its management or affairs and may not represent other members or attempt to influence them by his actions or utterances. 
(e)  Meetings: Service in preparing for, organizing or conducting a political meeting or rally, addressing such a meeting, or taking any part therein, except as a spectator, is prohibited. 
(f)  Activity at the polls and for candidates: It is the duty of an employee to avoid any offensive activity at caucuses, primary and regular elections. He must refrain from soliciting votes, assisting voters to mark ballots, helping to get out the voters on registration and election days, acting as the accredited checker, watcher or challenger of any party or faction, assisting in counting the vote, or engaging in any other activity at the polls except to cast his own vote. Rendering service, such as transporting voters to and from the polls and candidates on canvassing tours, whether for pay or gratuitously, is held to be within the scope of political activities prohibited by the rule, even if such service is performed without regard to political party. It is provided however, that the provisions hereof prohibiting the transportation of voters shall not apply to the public transportation system and where by resolution the council authorizes the free use of the public transportation system on election days the same shall not be in violation of this subparagraph of this section of the Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Election of officers: Service as judge of election, inspector, checker, teller, or as election officer of any kind is prohibited. 
(h)  Newspapers; publication of letters or articles: A classified employee may not publish or be connected editorially or managerially with any political newspaper and may not write for publication or publish any letter or articles, signed or unsigned, in favor of or against any political party, candidate, function or measure. An employee who writes such a letter or article is responsible for any use that may be made of it whether or not he gives consent to such use. 
(i)  Parades: An employee may not march in a political parade, organize or be an officer or leader of such parades. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a merit system employee from performing the specific duties of his position. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 16, § 3, 8-17-71; Ord. No. 74-176, § 1, 12-3-74) 
Sec. 16B-16-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former § 16B-16-4, which pertained to acceptance of gifts or gratuity and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 16, adopted Aug. 17, 1971. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 
ARTICLE XVII. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, adopted April 13, 1999, repealed former Art. XVII of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. XVII, §§ 16B-17-1—16B-17-4, pertained to appeals and grievance procedures and derived from Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 17, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 17, 1971; Ord. No. 71-287, § 3, adopted Nov. 2, 1971; Ord. No. 78-46, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 2, 1978; Ord. No. 78-78, § 1, adopted June 30, 1978; Ord. No. 80-150, § 1, adopted Dec. 30, 1980; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, adopted January 13, 1981; and Ord. No. 89-26, adopted March 21, 1989. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-21 adopted Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules , 220-502 Disciplinary Action , 220-503 Involuntary Termination of Employment , 220-504 Fair Treatment Policy , and 220-505 Personnel Review Board, dated April 1, 1999; official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the office of the city manager. 

Secs. 16B-17-1—16B-17-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16B-18-1. - Effective date. 
These merit system regulations shall become effective on the date adopted as provided by the Charter, section 8-303. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 18, § 1, 8-17-71) 
Sec. 16B-18-2. - Saving clause. 
If any chapter, section or other portion of these regulations is found to be invalid by duly constituted authority, it shall not affect the validity of the balance of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-213, Ch. 18, § 2, 8-17-71) 
ARTICLE XIX. - NEPOTISM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 86-16, enacted Feb. 25, 1986, amended Ch. 16B by adding thereto a new article pertaining to nepotism. Designation of such provisions as Art. XIX, §§ 16B-19-1—16B-19-6, is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 16B-19-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish policy and guidelines for department heads and the personnel division to be followed during the hiring process for the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(1), 2-25-86) 
Sec. 16B-19-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed. 
Immediate family. For purposes of this policy, immediate family includes the employee's spouse, child, stepchild, parents, stepmother, mother-in-law, stepfather, father-in-law, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandparent, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, and first cousin. 
Supervisor. To supervise implies the routine assignment of work and an evaluation of the results; involvement in the approval process for overtime, vacation and sick leave, and other decisions and recommendations related to the work environment. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(2), 2-25-86) 
Sec. 16B-19-3. - Policy. 
(a)  Department heads will not permit the employment of members of their immediate family within their respective departments. 
(b)  Immediate family members of division managers will not he employed in roles directly subordinate to the division manager. 
(c)  Those employees who become in contravention of the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) above, and those employees who become so affected because of the assignment of a department or division head, will be given a reasonable time (not to exceed six months) in which to find another position outside the relatives' span of control. 
(d)  Those employees who become in contravention of this policy because of marriage will be handled in accordance with paragraph (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(3), 2-25-86) 
Sec. 16B-19-4. - Exceptions. 
Conditions and requirements as outlined in section 16B-19-3 which are in existence prior to the effective date of this policy will not apply. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(4), 2-25-86; Ord. No. 88-75, 7-26-88) 
Sec. 16B-19-5. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
Department and division heads are responsible for enforcement of this policy within their span of control. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(5), 2-25-86) 
Sec. 16B-19-6. - Counsel and audit. 
A personnel technician I, employment, is responsible for keeping this article current, and recommending changes when necessary. If it becomes known that this article of the personnel regulations is being abused, it is the responsibility of the personnel technician I to inform the personnel officer. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(6), 2-25-86) 
ARTICLE XX. - FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-75, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 16B, Art. XX, §§ 16B-20-1—16B-20-4 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 16B-20-1. - Policy adopted. 
The attached Family and Medical Leave Policy is hereby adopted. Such policy is not included herein but is on file in the offices of the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-75, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 16B-20-2. - City manager to enforce policy. 
The city manager is authorized to define, implement, maintain and enforce programs consistent with this policy to provide for the mandated family and medical leave. 
(Ord. No. 93-75, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 16B-20-3. - Personnel division to proceed with plans. 
The personnel division is directed to proceed with implementation plans to include provisions for notification, eligibility, record keeping, confidential medical information, other leave and benefit coordination, reinstatements, and general administration necessary for immediate implementation. 
(Ord. No. 93-75, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 16B-20-4. - Department heads, program managers and elected officials subject to policy. 
All department heads, program managers and elected officials with covered employees are subject to the policy hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 93-75, 9-7-93) 
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Director of public safety, § 4-320 et seq.; department of public safety, § 4-500; pensions and personnel, § 8-300 et seq. 
Cross reference— Offenses of impersonating policemen, § 14-35; offense of obstructing officer in the discharge of his duties, § 14-47; offense of imitating police whistles, § 14-48; numbering of residences, buildings receiving police calls, § 18-53. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Badge—Possession of official badge only. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a police badge of the city except the official police badge. 
(Ord. of 5-2-23, § 2) 
Sec. 17-2. - Same—Possession by authorized personnel only. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession the police badge mentioned in the preceding section, except a police officer of the city or some officer authorized by law to exercise police power for the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-23, § 3) 
Sec. 17-3. - Same—Sale, delivery, etc.; certificate, required, by whom signed. 
It shall be unlawful, in the city or its police district, for any person to sell or deliver to any other person any badge containing the word "detective", "police", "sheriff", "deputy sheriff", "marshal", "deputy marshal", or other words descriptive of a law enforcement or peace officer, unless the person to whom such badge is sold or delivered first furnishes to the person so selling or delivering such badge a written certificate showing that the person to whom the badge is sold or delivered is legally the type of officer to which such badge applies. Such certificate is to be signed by the officer or legal authority charged with the appointment of such type of officer, except that if the wording on such badge is descriptive of any officer elected by vote of the people the certificate shall be signed by the Ordinary of Muscogee County. 
(Ord. of 10-1-46, § 1) 
Sec. 17-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 17-4, relative to enforcement of city laws within the police district, derived from Ord. of Sept. 5, 1923, § 1, and Ord. No. 68-225, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 1968, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. 
Sec. 17-5. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of the police officers of Columbus, Georgia shall be the entire area of Columbus, Georgia. The police officers are hereby authorized to make cases for violations of the law, to issue summons, and to take other actions necessary to the fulfillment of their duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 2; Ord. No. 78-65, § 4, 5-23-78) 
Sec. 17-6. - Stolen, abandoned or impounded property—Disposition by police. 
All personal property (except as herein stated) now in the possession of the police department of the City of Columbus, or which may hereafter come into the possession of said department, where said property has been stolen, or where the ownership is unknown to the chief of police, or where such property has been impounded for violation of any law relating to traffic for a period of 60 days and has not been claimed or called for by the owner or other person having the right to possession of the impounded property, shall be handled and disposed of as follows: 
All such property shall be safely kept, for a period of 60 days after being received by the department, in a room provided therefor at police headquarters, and if after the expiration of that time the same shall be unclaimed by a person making proof of ownership satisfactory to the chief of police, such property shall, by the chief of police, be advertised and sold. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 1; Ord. No. 62-133, § 1, 12-27-62) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 62-133 amended the ordinance of June 20, 1938, from which above § 17-6 is derived, to add the provision relating to impounded property in the first paragraph. 
Sec. 17-7. - Same—Notice of sale, posting publication, information. 
The advertisement of such property for sale shall, (except as hereinafter stated), be posted at the door of the County Court House in Muscogee County, Georgia, and published one time in a newspaper regularly published in the city, such posting and publication to be at least ten days before the date set by the chief of police for such sale. The advertisement shall give a description of the articles to be sold, and the time when and the place where the sale will take place. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 2) 
Sec. 17-8. - Same—Time and place of sales. 
All such sales shall be held in front of police headquarters in the city, between the hours of eleven o'clock a.m., Central Standard Time, and three o'clock p.m., Central Standard Time, and shall be at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, such a sale of personal property may be held at any place within the corporate limits of the city, which is specified in the advertisement of such sale. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 3; Ord. of 9-21-54, § 1) 
Sec. 17-9. - Same—Perishable property. 
Any unclaimed perishable property coming into the possession of the police department may, in the discretion of the chief of police, be sold by him at either public or private sale, either without advertisement or upon such advertisement, as he deems expedient. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 4) 
Sec. 17-10. - Same—Destruction of weapons or claim by finder. 
(a)  The preceding sections relating to disposition of stolen or abandoned property will not authorize the sale of any weapons that are illegal per se or that are prohibited by law, nor shall the sale of any weapons under the preceding sections be consummated unless all provisions regulating such sales imposed by local, state, or federal law are met. The police chief shall have the authority to conduct the sale of weapons in bulk and to receive bulk bids on any given number of weapons available for sale. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the finder of the property, unless he is an employee of a law enforcement agency of Columbus, Georgia, or convicted of a felony, may claim such property after the expiration of the 60-day period required by this section, and provided such weapon is a legal weapon. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 7; Ord. No. 80-86, § 1, 7-22-80; Ord. No. 91-31, 5-7-91) 
Sec. 17-11. - Same—Record of disposition, information. 
The chief of police shall keep a record showing when such property came into the possession of the police department, where found or from whom taken, its description, when claimed and by whom, or when advertised and when sold, and the amount for which each article is sold. All funds derived from such sales shall be paid by the chief of police to the treasurer of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 5) 
Sec. 17-12. - Same—Animals excluded from provisions. 
This chapter shall not apply in the cases of animals coming into the possession of or impounded by the police department, but such animals shall be handled and disposed of in accordance with existing provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-20-38, § 6) 
Cross reference— Provision relevant to impounding of animals, §§ 5-5, 5-18. 
Sec. 17-13. - Metro drug task force. 
(a)  Authorization. The chief of the police department and the county sheriff are authorized to participate in the joint law enforcement activities of the metro drug task force to the extent permitted by applicable law, with such task force described in detail by documents entitled "Metro Narcotics Task Force" which are on file in the office of the clerk of council. 
(b)  Forfeited money or currency; administration. Money and currency which is forfeited under the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (including money and currency from forfeited or condemned property) which vests in and which is paid into the county treasury as county funds shall be released from the county treasury and shall be jointly administered by the chief of the police department and the county sheriff and designated for use by the members of their respective departments in conjunction with law enforcement activities of the metro drug task force under the following conditions and within the following limits: 
(1)  The amount so released, administered and designated shall be placed in a separate account which shall not exceed $100,000.00 at any one time. 
(2)  All money and currency in said account shall be derived from cases involving members of the Columbus Police Department or members of the Muscogee County Sheriff's Department in conjunction with law enforcement activities of the Metro Drug Task Force. 
(3)  No provision contained herein shall affect any accounts previously established for the use of the police department or the county sheriffs department pursuant to Ordinance Number 82-64 and the provisions of Ordinance Number 82-64 shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  Use of funds. The money and currency contained in the account shall be used to defray nonbudgeted narcotic investigative costs as permitted under O.C.G.A. section 16-13-49, and these funds shall supplement any funds budgeted for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89-48, §§ 1—3, 4-25-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-48, adopted April 25, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of 1—3 as § 17-13 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 17-14. - Duties of police chief. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the Columbus Police Department. The chief shall be responsible to the mayor for the overall operations of the department. The chief of police is the ranking officer of the department and shall have authority over all personnel, sworn and nonsworn, within the department. 
(b)  The chief shall be responsible for the selection, training, assignment and promotion of all personnel. The chief shall have the authority to discipline, including the termination of, any departmental personnel. 
(c)  The chief is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and to establish policy and procedure governing the conduct of departmental employees and the activities and operations of the police department. The chief is responsible for the fiscal management of the department and shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the mayor and city manager. 
(d)  The chief of police shall make a monthly written report to the mayor outlining the activities, accomplishments and condition of the department. 
(e)  The chief may delegate any of the responsibilities of the office to any of the subordinates within the police department. 
(Ord. No. 91-117, 12-13-91) 
Editor's note— The provisions of Ord. No. 91-117, adopted Dec. 31, 1991, amending Ch. 17 by adding a new section, were included as § 17-14 at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Office of chief of police, § 17-21.2. 
Sec. 17-15. - Forfeited money. 
(a)  Money which is forfeited pursuant to any state or federal law, including money obtained from the sale of forfeited property, which is made available to the police department or the sheriff shall be accounted for and used under the following conditions: 
(1)  All forfeited money made available to the police department shall be deposited in the police forfeiture fund, which is hereby established for the exclusive uses provided herein. All forfeited money made available to the sheriff shall be deposited in the sheriff's forfeiture fund, which is hereby established for the exclusive uses provided herein. The police forfeiture fund and the sheriff's forfeiture fund shall be maintained by the finance director as special revenue funds in a manner which conforms to all applicable state and federal laws or regulations governing forfeitures, and to all laws and regulations governing the accounting and use of public funds. 
(2)  The money contained in the funds established herein shall be used for unbudgeted operating expenditure of the police department and sheriff, but in no event shall forfeited money be used for personnel expenses or for any purpose prohibited by state or federal law or to supplant funds which otherwise would be made available to the police department or sheriff through the annual budget. The mayor/director of public safety will receive quarterly audit reports of the funds activity. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the money contained in the funds established herein may be used as matching funds for grants if permitted by the state or federal laws under which the forfeiture are obtained. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to forfeitures made available to Metro Narcotics Task Force pursuant to section 17-13 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Ordinance No. 82-64 is hereby repealed. The finance director shall take such actions as are necessary to place funds currently in the sheriff's account established therein in the sheriff's forfeiture fund and to place funds in the police department account established therein in the police forfeiture fund. 
(Ord. No. 98-22, §§ 1—3, 3-10-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-22, §§ 1-3, adopted March 10, 1998, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 17-15 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 17-16—17-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COLUMBUS POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. II, §§ 17-21—17-33, which pertained to promotional procedures and derived from Ord. No. 70-157, § 2, adopted June 15, 1970; Ord. No. 80-62, § 1, adopted May 20, 1980; and Ord. No. 80-71, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 10, 1980, was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 81-96, enacted Sept. 22, 1981. Said § 2 further enacted, in lieu of the repealed provisions, a new Art. II, §§ 17-21.1—17-21.6 as herein set forth; and §§ 3—5 of the ordinance enacted new Arts. III—V, §§ 17-22—17-34. In order to accommodate new Arts. III—V, § 1 of Ord. No. 81-96 redesignated former Arts. III and IV as Arts. VI and VII, respectively. The section numbers within said articles were not changed. 

Sec. 17-21.1. - Divisions; bureaus; office of professional standards; sections. 
There are hereby created the following two divisions, four bureaus and respective sections within the Columbus Police Department: 
(a)  Division of line operations, and within the division, there shall be two bureaus; bureau of patrol services and bureau of investigative services. 
(1)  Bureau of patrol services, and within the bureau, there shall be the following sections: 
a.  Patrol section. 
b.  Motor section. 
c.  Parking control section. 
d.  School crossing guards section. 
(2)  Bureau of investigative services, and within the bureau, there shall be the following sections: 
a.  Identification section. 
b.  Juvenile section. 
c.  Investigative section. 
1.  Persons crimes unit. 
2.  Property crimes unit. 
(b)  Division of staff operations, and within the division, there shall be two bureaus; bureau of support services and the bureau of administrative services. 
(1)  Bureau of support services, and within the bureau, there shall be the following sections: 
a.  Records section. 
b.  Desk services section. 
c.  Property and evidence section. 
d.  911 center. 
e.  ABC/photo section. 
f.  Systems analysis section. 
(2)  Bureau of administrative services, and within the bureau, there shall be the following sections: 
a.  Crime prevention/community relations. 
b.  Personnel. 
c.  Training. 
d.  Conditional discharge. 
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 84-26, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-84; Ord. No. 87-96, § 1, 7-21-87; Ord. No. 88-113, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 92-50, § 1, 6-16-92) 
Sec. 17-21.2. - Office of chief of police. 
The office of the chief of police shall consist of: 
(a)  The chief of police. 
(b)  Office of professional standards. 
(c)  Intelligence. 
(d)  Vice and tactical unit. 
(e)  Budget. 
(f)  Polygraph. 
(g)  Metro narcotics task force. 
(h)  Crime analysis. 
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 84-26, § 3, 4-10-84; Ord. No. 87-96, § 2, 7-21-87; Ord. No. 88-113, § 3, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 92-50, § 2, 6-16-92) 
Cross reference— Duties of chief of police, § 17-14. 
Sec. 17-21.3. - Assignment of personnel. 
All personnel in all sections, units and bureaus shall be assigned by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 17-21.4. - Appointment of personnel. 
Each bureau shall be commanded by a major, appointed by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 17-21.5. - Positions confirmed in the organizational chart. 
All positions in the organizational chart as set forth in section 17-21.6 herein, are hereby confirmed and made a part of the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 17-21.6. - Organizational chart. 

ARTICLE III. - PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 96-71, adopted Aug. 6, 1996, repealed Art. III, §§ 17-22.1, 17-22.2, 17-23—17-25, 17-26.1—17-26.3, 17-27, 17-28, 17-29.1, and 17-29.2, which pertained to promotional procedures and derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 84-107, adopted Nov. 20, 1984; §§ 1—5 of Ord. No. 87-132, adopted Sept. 29, 1987; § 2 of Ord. No. 89-10, Jan. 24, 1989; and §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 92-49, adopted June 16, 1992. Section 1 of Ord. No. 96-71 also provided for a new Art. III as herein set out. 

Sec. 17-22. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-22.1. - Administrative responsibility. 
The chief of police of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, shall have administrative responsibility for all matters relating to the promotional procedures of the police department, except as otherwise may be provided for herein. 
Sec. 17-22.2. - Use of external sources. 
In order to provide for an impartial implementation of this article, the chief of police shall contract with, or otherwise arrange with, an entity outside the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia Police Department to prepare and administer all written examinations and assessment centers. No member of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia Police Department shall serve as an evaluator in any assessment center conducted specifically to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-23. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be used to administer and interpret Article III of Chapter 17: 
(a)  Applicant: Employees who assert they are eligible for promotion to the rank of police sergeant, police lieutenant or police captain in the police department of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Eligible: Any applicant certified in writing by the chief of police to participate in the applicable promotional procedure. 
(c)  Participant: Any employee who, upon being certified as eligible by the chief of police and actually engages in any or all of the applicant procedures for the rank for which he has been certified as eligible. 
(d)  Candidate: Any participant whose name appears on the promotional roster established for the rank for which he is competing. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-24. - General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia Police Department to select only from among the best qualified employees for promotions to positions of greater responsibility. Concurrently, it shall be the policy of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia Police Department to administer promotional procedures which yield valid and reliable information on which to base promotional decisions and to insure rigorous and fair competition among all employees eligible for promotion. 
(b)  Separate eligibility requirements, promotional procedures, promotional rosters, and other provisions relating to the ranks of police sergeant, police lieutenant and police captain are specified herein. Policy shall be promulgated by affected departments of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia to implement the provisions and intent of this or related enactments. 
(c)  Each promotional rank, those being police sergeant, police lieutenant and police captain, shall have a separate promotional roster which shall have a duration or life of 24 months from the date on which it is established. A new promotional roster must be established within 90 calendar days of the lapse of the previous promotional roster for that rank. 
(d)  The chief of police shall fill each promotional vacancy within 30 calendar days from a valid promotional roster. Provided, however, that if a vacancy occurs within the last 30 calendar days of the life of a promotional roster, such vacancy or vacancies must be filled before the promotional roster can lapse. If a vacancy occurs after the expiration of a roster and before the establishment of a new roster, that vacancy must be filled within 15 working days after the new roster is established. 
(e)  With respect to written test scores, each participant may review his/her own examination and the applicable keyed examination. Examinations and keyed examinations will not be released, except as may be otherwise legally required. Each participant will be provided with their written test score and a rank ordered list of written test scores so as to allow the participant to determine where he/she fell in that ranking. There will be no identifying information connected with the list of rank ordered written test scores. Participants desiring to do so must make a written protest within five days of receiving their examination scores. The Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, Chief of Police and Director of Personnel, or their designee, shall respond in writing within 15 days of the receipt of a written protest as to its disposition. 
(f)  Prior to the assessment center, the outside entity will furnish the chief of police and the personnel officer with a listing of the predetermined range used to band the participants. The personnel officer will be responsible for posting the range standards so any participant may review them prior to the assessment center. With respect to the assessment center results, candidates who personally participated may review their own scores and narrative summaries and make protests and receive responses as provided for in section 17-24(e) above. 
(g)  All promotions shall be probationary and no officer shall be permanently appointed to a rank until a six-month probation period is satisfactorily completed. Such probationary period may be extended six months in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. During either the original term or an extension of a probationary period, the chief of police may return a candidate to his previous rank for cause. 
(h)  Any candidate who declines a promotion shall do so in writing and shall be eliminated for further promotional consideration for the duration of the promotional roster on which his name appears. 
(i)  Eligibles shall be responsible for providing documentation verifying their claims to education points if such documentation is not in their permanent personnel files. 
(j)  No promotion shall be made under this promotional procedure when a vacancy occurs in a nonbudgeted position, except where the candidate for such position is occupying a police assignment level equal to or greater in salary than the permanent rank position that is vacant. 
(k)  Other appeals: The right of an employee to challenge any aspect of the administration of the promotional procedure which has a direct impact upon his promotability is fundamental to any equitable system. Appeals not specifically provided for elsewhere in Article III of Chapter 17 may be made and shall be disposed of in the manner described in section 17-24(e); provided, however, the selection of an individual(s) for promotion shall not be subject to such appeal process. 
(l)  Availability of source material: No announcement of the beginning of a police sergeant's or police lieutenant's promotional procedure can be made until sufficient source material from which written examination questions are to be drawn are available to immediately implement a reasonable system of loan to eligibles. 
(m)  To be eligible for the appointed position of detective and technician, candidates must hold the rank of police officer or its equivalent, as determined by the chief of police, and have a minimum of four years continuous service, including the probationary period, as a police officer with the Columbus Police Department. Such appointed position shall be made at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(n)  Employees appointed to the position of either detective or technician are to carry the assigned title, paygrade and step for so long as they hold either position. Removal from the detective or technician position shall be at the discretion of the chief of police, based on one or more of the following: Disciplinary reasons, poor job performance, or administrative or operational manpower allocations or adjustments. Employees being reverted back to a police officer status shall forfeit the title and the step increase they received as a result of their initial appointment and shall be placed in the appropriate paygrade and step of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-25. - Eligibility for promotions. 
(a)  For promotion to police sergeant. To be eligible to participate in the promotional procedure for police sergeant, the employee must hold the rank of police officer or its equivalent as determined by the chief of police and have a minimum of five years' continuous service, including the probationary period, with the Police Department of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. For purposes of computation of service, all eligibles who will have completed the fifth year of such service on the date on which the written phase of the sergeant's promotional procedure is given, shall be deemed to have met the length of service requirement. 
(b)  For promotion to police lieutenant. To be eligible to participate in the promotional procedure for police lieutenant, the employee must hold the rank of police sergeant and have a minimum of three years' continuous service, including the probationary period, as a police sergeant with the Police Department of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. For purposes of computation of service, eligibles who will have completed the third year of such service on the date on which the written phase of the lieutenant's promotional procedure is given, shall be deemed to have met the length of service requirement. 
(c)  For promotion to police captain. To be eligible to participate in the promotional procedure for police captain, the employee must hold the rank of police lieutenant and have a minimum of two years of continuous service, including the probationary period, as a police lieutenant with the Police Department of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. All eligibles who have completed the second year of service on the first day of the captain's assessment center, shall be deemed to have met the length of service requirement. 
(d)  As of January 1, 2000, to be eligible to participate in any future promotional procedure for sergeant, lieutenant and captain, the employee must possess a minimum of an associate degree in any field within the educational guidelines set forth by this Columbus Police Department. As of January 1, 2002, to be eligible to participate in any future promotional procedure for lieutenant and captain, the employee must possess a minimum of a baccalaureate degree in any field within the educational guidelines set forth by this Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 00-29, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 17-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-26.1. - Promotional procedure for police sergeant. 
For promotion to the rank of police sergeant, the following sequence of phrases shall be followed: 
(a)  Certification of eligibility. At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the written examination, the chief of police shall announce in writing all pertinent facts relating to the police sergeant's promotional procedures, including source material from which the questions are to be drawn. At the end of the ten calendar days following such announcement, the application period shall be deemed closed and within another ten calendar days, the chief shall certify in writing the list of those eligible to participate. 
(b)  Written test. A 100 question multiple-choice written examination, based on the results of a job-task analysis, shall be administered. A participant's preliminary test scores may be released to him/her when tests are graded onsite immediately following an examination. Final written examination scores will not be released to participants until all appeals and any appropriate adjustments have been made. Any adjustments arising out of any analysis of the test shall be specified in a written report and shall be made available for review by participants in the same manner as provided for by section 17-24(e). No participant shall have been deemed to have passed the written examination unless they score at least 70 or above on that examination. All participants scoring 70 or above shall advance to the assessment center phase. 
(c)  Assessment center. The assessment center shall consist of a minimum of three exercises, such as oral presentation, role-playing, in-basket tasks, and other written problem analyses that are designed to evaluate job-related dimensions. Upon completion of the sergeant's assessment center phase, candidates must, based upon their performance on exercises derived from a job-task analysis, be assigned to one of two promotional priorities to be considered for promotion: 
(1)  "Highly recommended for promotion," and 
(2)  "Recommended for promotion." 
All candidates that score below the recommended standard will not be considered during this promotional process. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-26.2. - Promotional procedures for police lieutenant. 
For promotion to the rank of police lieutenant, the following sequence of phases shall be followed: 
(a)  Certification of eligibility. At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the written examination, the chief of police shall announce in writing all pertinent facts relating to the police lieutenant's promotional procedures, including source material from which the questions are to be drawn. At the end of ten calendar days following such announcement, the application period shall be deemed closed and within another ten calendar days, the chief shall certify in writing the list of those eligible to participate. 
(b)  Written test. A 100 question multiple-choice written examination, based on the results of a job-task analysis, shall be administered. A participant's preliminary test scores may be released to him/her when tests are graded onsite immediately following an examination. Final written examination scores will not be released to participants until all appeals and any appropriate adjustments have been made. Any adjustments arising out of any analysis of the test shall be specified in a written report and shall be made available for review by participants in the same manner as provided for by section 17-24(e). No participant shall have been deemed to have passed the written examination unless they score at least 70 or above on that examination. All participants scoring 70 or above shall advance to the assessment center phase. 
(c)  Assessment center. The assessment center shall consist of a minimum of three exercises, such as oral presentation, role-playing, in-basket tasks, and other written problem analyses that are designed to evaluate job-related dimensions. Upon completion of the lieutenant's assessment center phase, candidates must, based upon their performance on exercises derived from a job-task analysis, be assigned to one of two promotional priorities to be considered for promotion: 
(1)  "Highly recommended for promotion," and 
(2)  "Recommended for promotion." 
All candidates that score below the recommended standard will not be considered during this promotional process. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-26.3. - Promotional procedure for police captain. 
(a)  Certification of eligibility. At least 60 calendar days prior to the date of the assessment center's first scheduled activity involving participants, the chief of police shall announce it in writing, along with other pertinent facts. At the end of ten calendar days following such announcement, the application period shall be deemed closed and within another ten calendar days, the chief of police shall certify in writing the list of those eligible to participate. 
(b)  Assessment center. All police lieutenants certified as eligible shall advance to an assessment center. The assessment center shall consist of a minimum of three exercises, such as oral presentation, role-playing, in-basket tasks, and other written problem analyses that are designed to evaluate job-related dimensions. Upon completion of the captain's assessment center, candidates must, based upon their performance on exercises derived from a job-task analysis, be assigned to one of two promotional priorities to be considered for promotion: 
(1)  "Highly recommended for promotion," or 
(2)  "Recommended for promotion." 
All candidates that score below the recommended standard will not be considered during this promotional process. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-26.4. - Promotional decisions. 
The chief of police shall promote all members of the "highly recommended for promotion" priority, prior to promoting any of the "recommended for promotion" priority. The chief of police shall consider the reports on each participant from the assessment center, as well as such other job-related matters including, but not limited to, education, seniority, performance evaluations, disciplinary actions and commendations, as the chief of police shall previously identify by written policy in making promotional decisions. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-27. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-28. - Effect of disciplinary action upon participant whose name appears in the "highly recommended" or "recommended for promotion" portions of the promotional roster. 
The chief of police shall as a result of one or more sustained disciplinary actions against a candidate do the following: 
(1)  Freeze the candidate's promotional consideration when the participant accumulates a total of five days' suspension time (eight hours per suspension day) in any 12 month period. 
(2)  Strike the participant's name from the promotional roster for the life of that roster when the participant accumulates a total of ten days' suspension time (eight hours per suspension day) in any 12-month period. 
(3)  A participant affected by section 17-28(2) during the life cycle of a given promotional roster will be charged under section 17-28(1), only for suspension days in excess of the ten days for which he/she was removed from the roster, for the next promotional cycle. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-29.1. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
All examinations, scores, files, records, administrative directives, and promotional results shall be stored in a secured area by the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, Police Department for four years following the publication of the promotional roster for each separate promotional procedure. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-29.2. - Annual review. 
The Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, Chief of Police, in conjunction with the Police Promotional Procedures Committee, shall annually review, evaluate and report to the mayor in writing as to the administration [of Article III, Chapter 17,] and recommend such changes as may be needed considering the totality of circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 8-6-96) 
ARTICLE IV. - APPOINTIVE POSITIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 96-71, adopted Aug. 6, 1996, repealed Art. IV, §§ 17-30 and 17-31, which pertained to appointive positions and derived from § 4 of Ord. No. 81-96, adopted Sept. 22, 1981; § 7 of Ord. No. 84-26, adopted April 10, 1984; Ord. No. 84-108, adopted Nov. 20, 1984; § 4 of Ord. No. 92-50, adopted June 16, 1992; and § 1 of Ord. No. 95-116, adopted Nov. 28, 1995. Section 2 of Ord. No. 96-71 also provided for a new Art. IV as herein set out. 

Sec. 17-30. - Position of assistant chief of police. 
(a)  The position of assistant chief of police is hereby created in the Columbus Police Department. 
(b)  To be eligible for the position of assistant chief of police, a candidate must have held the permanent rank of captain for two years or the appointed rank of major for one year in the Columbus Police Department. To be considered eligible for this position the candidate must possess a master's degree in any field within the educational guidelines set forth by the Columbus Police Department. 
(c)  The job description for assistant chief of police is hereby incorporated in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-31. - Position of major. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position and rank of major in the Columbus Police Department. The job description for major is incorporated in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(b)  The rank of major is an appointed rank. Said appointment [is] to be made by the chief of police. 
(c)  To be appointed to the rank of major, a captain shall have held the permanent rank of captain for a minimum of one year and possess a master's degree in any field within the educational guidelines set forth by the Columbus Police Department. Consideration shall be given to the following: 
(1)  Leadership; 
(2)  Directing; 
(3)  Controlling; 
(4)  Coordinating; 
(5)  Decision-making; 
(6)  Planning; 
(7)  Communicating; 
(8)  Public relations; 
(9)  Stress reactions; 
(10)  Handling personnel matters; 
(11)  Health; 
(12)  Appearance. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 8-6-96) 
Secs. 17-32, - 17-33. Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 96-71, adopted Aug. 6, 1996, repealed Art. V, §§ 17-34 and 17-35, which pertained to authorized personnel and interim provisions and derived from § 5 of Ord. No. 81-96, adopted Sept. 22, 1981; §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 81-144, adopted Dec. 15, 1981; §§ 9—12 of Ord. No. 84-26, adopted April 10, 1984; Ord. No. 84-37, adopted May 1, 1984; Ord. No. 91-17, adopted Mar. 19, 1991; and § 5 of Ord. No. 92-50, adopted June 16, 1992. Section 3 of Ord. No. 96-71 also provided for a new Art. V as herein set out. 

Sec. 17-34. - Authorized personnel for Columbus Police Department. 
(a)  There shall be a chief of police. 
(b)  The Columbus Police Department shall be authorized one assistant chief of police, who shall be appointed by the chief of police. 
(c)  The Columbus Police Department shall be authorized five majors, who shall be appointed by the chief of police and shall be assigned as follows: 
(1)  Major in charge of the bureau of patrol services. 
(2)  Major in charge of the bureau of investigative services. 
(3)  Major in charge of the bureau of support services. 
(4)  Major in charge of bureau of administrative services. 
(5)  Major in charge of the office of professional standards. 
(d)  The ranks of assistant chief, major and detective/technician are appointed ranks, to be appointed by the chief of police, and any officer who fails to perform the duties of these ranks satisfactorily may at any time be reverted to his former permanent rank. 
(e)  Sworn personnel. 
(1)  The following positions are hereby established as the authorized strength of the sworn personnel of the Columbus Police Department: 
Chief of police ..... 1 
Assistant chief of police ..... 1 
Major ..... 5 
Captain ..... 7 
Lieutenant ..... 20 
Sergeant ..... 59 
Detective ..... 57 
Technician ..... 17 
Police officer ..... 219 
Systems technician ..... 1 
Systems program manager ..... 1 
(2)  The job descriptions are incorporated in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 3, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 17-35. - Police cadets. 
(a)  Position created. The position of police cadet is hereby created in the Columbus Police Department. 
(b)  Qualifications. A person seeking the position of police cadet shall possess the same minimum qualifications as a police officer except for a college education, and the age requirements for initial employment as a cadet shall be the ages of 18 through 20. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 3, 8-6-96) 
Secs. 17-36—17-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-7, adopted Jan. 19, 1971, amended Ch. 17 by adding Art. III, §§ 17-34—17-37.5. Said sections were renumbered as §§ 17-44—17-56 respectively, with the permission of the city, to preserve format. Said sections, providing for investigation of and action upon alleged or suspected misconduct of police personnel, were repealed by Ord. No. 71-264, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 1971. Sec. 2 of said ordinance added new §§ 17-44 and 17-45 establishing the disciplinary authority of the chief of police and the personnel review board. Subsequently, § 1 of Ord. No. 81-96, enacted Sept. 22, 1981 changed the designation of Art. III to Art. VI. 

Sec. 17-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 83-98, enacted Dec. 20, 1983, repealed former § 17-44, which pertained to the disciplinary powers of the chief of police and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 71-264, enacted Oct. 19, 1971. Section 2 of Ord. No. 83-98 amended § 17-45 to read as set forth below. 
Sec. 17-45. - Authority of chief of police; appeals to personnel review board. 
The chief of police is hereby given the authority to discipline the members of the Columbus Police Department, including suspension without pay and/or discharge from the service. Any punishment is subject to appeal to the personnel review board. 
(Ord. No. 71-264, § 3, 10-19-71; Ord. No. 83-98, § 2, 12-20-83) 
Secs. 17-46—17-56. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-57. - Grounds for suspensions and dismissal. 
(a)  The chief of police can dismiss any officer prior to a hearing by the police hearing board for: 
(1)  Insubordination, 
(2)  Use of alcoholic beverages or drugs while are illegal while on duty, 
(3)  Gross immorality, 
(4)  Bribery, 
(5)  Conversion or gross mishandling of evidence, 
(6)  Dangerous misuse of firearms, 
(7)  Evidence of the officer's commission of a felony, 
(8)  Conduct unbecoming an officer. 
(b)  The chief and officers of the rank of sergeant and above can suspend an officer for violation of rules and regulations or conduct unbecoming an officer upon good information of such misconduct for no more than 24 hours without approval of the chief, deputy chief or a major. 
(c)  Officers will not be suspended for more than 30 days unless they have been served with a warrant or are subjects of indictments. 
(Ord. No. 71-154, § 1, 6-10-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-154, § 1, was enacted as adding § 17-38. However, in view of the fact Ord. No. 71-7, establishing disciplinary procedures, was enacted as adding §§ 17-34—17-37.5, and said sections were renumbered as §§ 17-44—17-56, the section added by Ord. No. 71-154 was renumbered as § 17-57. See also the editor's footnote to this article. 
Secs. 17-58, - 17-59. Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 72-55, enacted April 11, 1972, amended Ch. 17 by adding thereto provisions designated as Art. IV, §§ 17-60—17-86. The designation of said provisions was changed to Art. VII by § 1 of Ord. No. 81-96, enacted Sept. 22, 1981. 

Sec. 17-60. - Responsibility of chief of police to appoint; general powers, duties of officers; officers subject to police department rules, regulations and orders; badges. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to appoint employees of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, and retired public safety officers who are also certified peace officers pursuant to the requirements of the Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Council as special enforcement officers for the consolidated government will be selected by the department for whom they are employed and then referred to the Columbus Police Department for appointment. Such retired officers must make application directly with the personnel officer of the police department. 
(b)  The chief of police may whenever expedient upon the application of any person, or corporation, showing the necessity, therefore, appoint and swear any number of special enforcement officers to do special duty in the consolidated city of Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  Special enforcement officers appointed pursuant of law while acting as special enforcement officers should possess the power, perform the duties, and be subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the Columbus Police Department in the same manner as regular sworn officers. Every such special enforcement officer shall wear a badge to be prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72; Ord. No. 72-79, § 1, 5-9-72; Ord. No. 72-80, 5-9-72; Ord. No. 91-118, 12-13-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-79, § 1, amended § 17-60(c) by requiring that the appointment of citizens as special enforcement officers during emergency, apprehension of riot, etc. be approved by the council by resolution in writing duly adopted after submission of the names of such citizens to the council. Ord. No. 72-80, § 1, repealed subsection (c) relative to the appointment of special enforcement officers during time of riot, etc. Former subsection (d) was redesignated (c) by the editors to maintain alphabetical sequences of subsections. 
Sec. 17-61. - Waiver of claim. 
Special enforcement officers, excluding those employed by the consolidated government of Columbus, in consideration of their appointment must sign an agreement releasing and waiving all claims whatever against the Columbus Police Department and the consolidated government of the City of Columbus, Georgia, for pay, salary, or other employee benefits, or compensation for their services and for all expenses connected therewith. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-62. - Powers and duties; "hot pursuit." 
Special enforcement officers shall during the term of their holding appointment, possess all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of the force applicable to regular police officers only at the place of their employment or assignment unless engaged in hot pursuit continuously from their point of assignment through adjacent areas. 
(a)  Such continuing pursuit with a view toward immediate apprehension is to be continued only in the absence of a regularly commissioned Columbus police officer. 
(b)  In all other instances support and cooperation of Columbus police officers is to be requested prior to special enforcement officers attempting apprehension away from their point of employment or assignment. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-63. - Removal. 
The special enforcement officer so appointed may be removed at any time by the chief of police, without assigning cause, therefore, and nothing in this section shall be construed to constitute such special enforcement officers as members of the force or entitle them to the privileges of the regular members of the force, or to receive any salary, pay, compensation, employee benefits, or monies whatever from the department or city, or to share in the police pension fund. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 17-64, which pertained to residence requirements for special enforcement officers, was repealed by Ord. No. 86-31, enacted March 25, 1986. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, enacted April 11, 1972. 
Sec. 17-65. - Application; photographing, fingerprinting of applicants; search of arrests, records; processing fee. 
Applicants must fill out an application in such detail as is required by the chief of police and must be photographed and fingerprinted. Where required, applicants must provide waivers permitting the police to search arrests and other records to develop their histories. A fee set by the chief of police will be paid by the applicant for the processing of an investigation of each application. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-66. - Investigation of applicants. 
Applicants must undergo such investigation as deemed advisable by the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-67. - Identification of officers; issuance of card; deposit. 
A special enforcement officer will receive an identification card containing his commission which must be returned to the Columbus Police Department upon his death, resignation, termination of employment or revocation of the appointment as special enforcement officer. A deposit of $5.00 will be made with the city treasurer for each commissioned card issued and is returnable upon surrender of the receipt for the deposit and commissioned card. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-68. - Altering identification card. 
Persons forfeiting, counterfeiting, or altering a special enforcement officer's identification card so that it may be used by a person other than the one it was originally issued shall be guilty of violating a city ordinance and punished as set out in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-69. - Loss of identification card. 
Special enforcement officers are required to advise the chief of police of the loss of their commissioned card with full details concerning the circumstances and what amount of effort was made to recover the card within 48 hours of determining the loss of the document. Failure to cooperate with the chief of police in his inquiries will result in the permanent loss of special enforcement officer commission and forfeiture of the deposit [required by section 17-67.] 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-70. - Uniform. 
The uniform of special enforcement officers will not be of similar design and color of that worn by members of the Columbus Police Department, Muscogee County Sheriff's Department and Muscogee County Marshal's Office, and shall be approved by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-71. - Shield and cap. 
Special enforcement officers will wear a shield and cap device. 
(a)  The shield should be made of metal and be easily distinguishable from those worn by members of the Columbus Police Department, Muscogee County Sheriff's Department and Muscogee County Marshal's Office. The clearly, legible words, "Special Enforcement Officer" are to be shown on the badge to the chief of police's satisfaction. Such other designs and insignia as desired by the employer may be placed upon the shield to give it character, but such additions are not to change the overall distinctions or obscure the clearly legible words "Special Enforcement Officer". 
(b)  The cap should be made of metal easily distinguishable from those worn by members of the Columbus Police Department, Muscogee County Sheriff's Department and Muscogee County Marshal's Office and bear the clearly visible words "Special Enforcement Officer". Other insignias and identification data can be placed on the cap device by the employer as long as the words "Special Enforcement Officer" are clearly visible and the design meets the standards set by the chief of police. 
(c)  Special enforcement officers when in uniform are to wear name badges showing their true names and printed clearly and legible at a minimum distance of six feet. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-72. - Firearms. 
A special enforcement officer who is required to carry a revolver or other firearm during the course of his duties shall have his employer direct a letter to the chief of police indicating that the special enforcement officer will carry firearms and that he will conform to all firearm ordinances and regulations set forth in the Code of Ordinances for the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia. The employer in his letter is to certify to the chief of police that he understands that full responsibility for the use of weapons must be borne by the special enforcement officer and the employer. Liability will not be accrued to the City of Columbus for special enforcement officers employed by private enterprises as a result of carrying or using weapons. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-73. - False representation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the Columbus Police Department to represent himself falsely as being a member with the fraudulent design upon persons or property, or to have, use, wear, or display without specific authority from the chief of police any uniform, shield, button, wreaths, numbers or other insignia or emblem in any way resembling that worn by members of the Columbus Police Department, Muscogee County Sheriff's Department or Muscogee County Marshal's Office. A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction of a city ordinance and be punishable in accordance with provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-74. - Vehicles generally. 
Special enforcement officers and their employers are not to operate vehicles of similar color and design or with insignias similar to that used by the Columbus Police Department and Muscogee County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-75. - Emergency lights. 
It shall be unlawful for special enforcement officers to drive a vehicle upon the streets of Columbus, Georgia displaying emergency lights designated under section 20-10.3 of the Columbus Code. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-76. - Orders. 
A special enforcement officer will be subject to the orders of the chief of police and will cooperate in the performance of his duties with members of the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-77. - Limitation on authority. 
A special enforcement officer will not perform duty for any person or corporation other than that for which he is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-78. - Duties of police department. 
Columbus police officers will observe special enforcement officers on duty and report to the chief of police any misconduct on the part of such officers or failure to comply with regulations. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-79. - Limitation on use of uniform. 
A special enforcement officer will not carry while off duty, except while going to and from his place of assignment, his shield, cap device, or wear his uniform. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-80. - Arrest; making charges. 
A special enforcement officer will forthwith upon making an arrest, bring the prisoner before the booking officer at the Columbus Police Department. Assistance from sworn members of the Columbus Police Department should be used in cases where suspects are to be formally arrested and charges lodged. Special enforcement officers should be familiar with existing requirements concerning rights of the criminally accused and should advise all persons taken into custody of these rights. Offense reports will be prepared by the special enforcement officer concerning arrests and other incidents in which they are involved and such reports will be turned in to the records division. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-81. - Testifying in court. 
A special enforcement officer is to appear and testify in cases charged against arrested persons at the proper time and place. Failure to appear may cause the commission of the special enforcement officer to be revoked and subject him to contempt of court charges. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-82. - Issuance of summons. 
When a special enforcement officer serves a summons, he shall deliver the original copy and one additional copy to Columbus Police Headquarters within eight hours of the time of issuance. The summons will be processed in the same manner as those issued by regular sworn personnel of the Columbus Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-83. - Change of residence. 
A special enforcement officer will promptly notify the chief of police of a change of residence. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-84. - Revocation of appointment. 
Noncompliance with any of the provisions of these rules will make the officer liable for revocation of his appointment. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-85. - Answer to mobilization. 
Upon notification of a mobilization call for special enforcement officers, they will report to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-86. - Penalties. 
Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 72-55, § 1, 4-11-72) 
Sec. 17-87. - Notice to council of appointments, removals. 
All appointments of special enforcement officers made by the chief of police under this article shall be furnished to the Council of Columbus. The chief of police shall inform the council of all initial appointees and thereafter shall notify the Council by the first meeting after an appointment is made, the names of such appointees and shall also notify the council when any appointee is removed from the list of special enforcement officers. Such list shall include the name and address of employer. 
(Ord. No. 72-69, § 1, 5-2-72) 
Chapter 17A - PRIVATE DETECTIVES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-49, §§ 1—8 enacted the provisions codified as Ch. 17A. Since said ordinance did not amend this Code, the manner of codification has been in the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 17A-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and the derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  City is the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(c)  Private detective is any person who accepts employment for hire, fee, or reward to furnish or supply information as to the personal character or actions or identity of any person or as to the character or kind of business or occupation of any person. The term shall not include a detective or officer belonging to the law enforcement agencies of the United States or of any state, county, or city. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 1, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-2. - License required; qualifications of licensee. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate as a private detective in the city without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided from the chief of police. 
(b)  Residence. No person shall operate as a private detective unless he shall have been a resident of the State of Georgia for a period of two (2) years and a resident of the city and county, or Fort Benning Reservation for two (2) years. 
(c)  Conviction of crime. No person shall operate as a private detective if he has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or a felony. 
(d)  Experience. No person shall operate as a detective unless he shall have had at least two (2) years of prior experience with a law enforcement agency or three (3) years experience as an investigator with a private detective agency or other commercial concern or two (2) years experience with a government agency. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, §§ 2A—2D, 6-3-63; Ord. No. 69-210, § 1, 11-10-69) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 69-210, § 1, amended § 17A-2(b) by reducing the state residency from five to two years and by adding after the word "county" the words, "or Fort Benning Reservation". 
Sec. 17A-3. - Application for license. 
Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the chief of police and shall state: 
(a)  The full name, age, residence, present and previous occupations of the applicant; 
(b)  A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant; 
(c)  The number of years experience the applicant has had as a private detective or in the related fields; 
(d)  The length of time applicant has been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia, City of Columbus, and County of Muscogee immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(e)  A list of three character references and at least three business references who have known the applicant for a period of at least five (5) years. 
(f)  A list of dates and places of employment for ten (10) years prior to date of application. 
(g)  A photograph and fingerprints made by the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 3, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-4. - Investigation of applicant. 
Within ten (10) days after receipt of an application as provided for herein the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operation. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 4, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-5. - Issuance of license. 
If upon investigation the chief of police, shall find that the applicant is a good moral character and has never been convicted of a misdemeanor or a felony, has met the resident requirement, hereunder, and has had adequate experience as required, hereunder, he shall issue a license to applicant. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 5, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-6. - Regulations, standards applicable to employees. 
All employees of any person having or applying for a license hereunder shall meet the standard set forth above and shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 6, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-7. - Notice of license to be filed with interested agencies, organizations. 
If approved, applicant must file a notice with all law enforcement agencies of his license within fifteen (15) days after approval and to such other bureaus or civic organizations as designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 7, 6-3-63) 
Sec. 17A-8. - Transferability of licenses; revocation, suspension. 
(a)  Transferability. Licenses issued hereunder shall not be transferable. 
(b)  Revocation and suspension. Licenses issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the chief of police for violation of any of the provisions of the chapter or misconduct by the licensee or his employees, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the licensee. The chief of police shall immediately notify any licensee, by personal service, of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 63-49, § 8, 6-3-63) 
Chapter 17B - PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17B-1. - To be peaceful and unattended by noise, etc. 
All assemblies and picketing shall be peaceful and unattended by excessive noise and boisterousness. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 1, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 84-120, § 1, 12-4-84) 
Sec. 17B-2. - Use of sidewalks and streets for picketing and demonstrating. 
Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only on public sidewalks maintained by the city or other walk areas on the public right-of-way, and only the outside five feet of said sidewalks next to the curb shall be used by the pickets or demonstrators. No picketing or demonstrating shall be conducted on the remaining portion of said sidewalks or on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 2, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 84-120, § 2, 12-4-84) 
Sec. 17B-3. - Method of marching; limitation on number of pickets or demonstrators before given place of business or facility. 
Marching shall be in single file, and pickets shall be limited to a total of 15 persons and shall not interfere with ingress or egress to any business or public facility. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 3, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 84-120, § 3, 12-4-84) 
Sec. 17B-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 17B-4, which limited pickets and demonstrators to one place of business or facility on any one block, was repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 84-120, enacted Dec. 4, 1984. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 63-101, § 4, enacted Nov. 4, 1963. 
Sec. 17B-5. - Placards and signs. 
Pickets or demonstrators shall carry only cardboard or paper placards or signs. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 5, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 84-120, § 5, 12-4-84) 
Secs. 17B-6, 17B-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 17B-6 and 17B-7 were repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 84-120, enacted Dec. 4, 1984. The repealed sections derived from Ord. No. 63-101, §§ 6, 7, enacted Nov. 4, 1963, and pertained to places where picketing is prohibited and prohibiting participation by persons under 16 years of age. 
Sec. 17B-8. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating. 
The chief of police of the City of Columbus is to be given at least five hours notice by any person or persons planning to picket or demonstrate. This written notice shall include the name of the organization or organizations planning to picket and also shall include the names of the places of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours that the picketing or demonstrating will be conducted. The chief of police shall immediately forward a copy of any such written notice to the business or public facility which is the subject of picketing or demonstration. All picketing or demonstration involving more than 15 persons shall comply with the advance notice and permit requirements contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 8, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 97-18, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 01-98, § 1, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17B-9. - Duty to disperse as directed by police. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the City of Columbus shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 9, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-10. - Use of vehicles for picketing or demonstrating. 
No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating line, and all pickets or demonstrators shall be afoot. 
(Ord. No. 63-101, § 10, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-11. - Demonstrations and festivals involving more than fifteen persons. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any picketing or demonstration or festival involving more than 15 persons unless a permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police or his designee. Application for a permit for any picketing or demonstration or festival must be made as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Filing. An application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the picketing or demonstration. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the picketing or demonstration; 
(2)  If the picketing or demonstration is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization; the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization, and the registered agent and officers if a corporation; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be the leader of the picketing or demonstration and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the picketing or demonstration is to be conducted; 
(5)  The location of the planned picketing or demonstration; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who will constitute such picketing or demonstration; 
(7)  The hours when such picketing or demonstration will be conducted; 
(8)  The time at which persons will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(9)  The interval of space, if any, to be maintained between units of the picketing or demonstration; 
(10)  If the picketing or demonstration is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person or organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person or organization proposing to conduct the picketing or demonstration, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of such person or organization; 
(11)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(d)  Late applications. The chief of police or his designee, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the time such picketing or demonstration is proposed to be conducted. 
(e)  Standards for issuance. The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the picketing or demonstration will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its location or route; 
(2)  A prior application for a permit for the same time and place has not been made or if made, would reasonably allow multiple occupancy of a particular area; and 
(3)  It reasonably appears that the picketing or demonstration will not present a clear and present danger to the public health or safety. 
(f)  The chief of police or his designee, after consultation with the public safety director or his designee, shall act upon the application for permit within five days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(g)  Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the Columbus Council. Appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The Columbus Council shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt. 
(h)  The chief of police, in denying an application for a picketing or demonstration permit, shall be required to tender a permit for picketing or demonstration on a date, at a location, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a permit under this article. 
(i)  Each permit for picketing or demonstration shall include the times for the event and such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(j)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The leader of the picketing or demonstration shall carry the permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the event. 
(k)  The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a permit for picketing or demonstration issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance or violation of permit conditions. 
(l)  All applicants for permits for any picketing or demonstration or festival involving more than 15 persons shall comply with all provisions of this article and article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-98, § 2, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 03-29, § 2, 5-13-03) 
Editor's note— Former § 17B-11, which contained the penalty for article violations, was repealed by Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, enacted July 26, 1983, (see § 1-8 of this Code for the current general penalty), and was also specifically repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 84-120, enacted Dec. 4, 1984. The repealed provisions derived from § 12 of Ord. No. 63-101, enacted Nov. 4, 1963. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 01-98, § 2, adopted October 23, 2001, enacted a new § 17B-11 as set out above. 
Sec. 17B-12. - Certain demonstrations prohibited. 
(a)  The Columbus Council declares that the interest of persons in planning, participating in and attending a funeral or memorial service for a deceased relative or loved one without unwanted impediment, disruption, disturbance, or interference is a substantial interest and the Columbus Council further recognizes the need to impose content neutral time, place, and manner restrictions on unwanted acts carried out with the intent to impede, disrupt, disturb, or interfere with such funeral or memorial service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to engage in any disorderly or disruptive conduct with the intent to impede, disrupt, disturb, or interfere with the orderly conduct of any funeral or memorial service, or with the normal activities and functions carried on in the facilities or buildings where such funeral or memorial service is taking place. Any or all of the following shall constitute such disorderly or disruptive conduct: 
(1)  Conducting a public assembly, parade, demonstration, or other like event, either fixed or processional, within 300 feet of the ceremonial site or location being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time one hour prior to, during, or one hour after the posted time for said funeral or memorial service; 
(2)  Displaying any visual images that convey fighting words or actual or imminent threats of harm directed to any person or property associated with said funeral or memorial service within 300 feet of the ceremonial site or location being used for the funeral or memorial service at any time one hour prior to, during, or one hour after the posted time for said funeral or memorial service; 
(3)  Uttering loud, threatening, or abusive language or singing, chanting, whistling, or yelling with or without noise amplification including, but not limited to, bullhorns, automobile horns, and microphones, such as would tend to impede, disrupt, disturb, or interfere with a funeral or memorial service within 300 feet of the ceremonial site or location being used for the funeral or memorial service; or 
(4)  Attempting to block or blocking pedestrian or vehicular access to the ceremonial site or location being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time one hour prior to, during, or one hour after the posted time for said funeral or memorial service. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-20, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Secs. 17B-13—17B-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Article II, §§ 17B-17—17B-38, is derived from Ord. No. 63-102, adopted 11-4-63. As said ordinance was not enacted as a part of this Code, it is included herein at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17B-17. - Short title. 
This ordinance [article] shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of the City of Columbus, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 1, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-18. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Chief of police" is the chief of police of the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  "City" is the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  "Parade" is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. 
(d)  "Parade permit" is a permit as required by this ordinance [article]. 
(e)  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 2, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-19. - Exceptions from article. 
This ordinance [article] shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76, as amended; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 2, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 5-13-03) 
Sec. 17B-20. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this ordinance [article]. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 12, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 17B-21, which contained the penalty for violations of this article, was repealed by Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, enacted July 26, 1983, (see § 1-8 for the current general penalty), and was also specifically repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 84-120, enacted Dec. 4, 1984. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 63-102, § 14, enacted Nov. 4, 1963. 
Sec. 17B-22. - Cash bond required of violators. 
Cash bonds only may be given to insure attendance at court [on a charge of violating this article]. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 17, 11-4-63) 
Editor's note— The words in brackets were added by the editor. 
Secs. 17B-23—17B-28. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 17B-29. - Required. 
No persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 3, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 01-98, § 3, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17B-30. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization, and the registered agent and officers if a corporation; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at such assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(d)  Late applications. The chief of police or his designee, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the time such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 4, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 01-98, § 4, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17B-31. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(a)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(b)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(c)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(d)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(e)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
(f)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(g)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; 
(h)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(i)  A prior application for a permit for the same time and place has not been made or if made, would reasonably allow multiple occupancy of a particular area; and 
(j)  It reasonably appears that the parade or event will not present a clear and present danger to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 5, 11-4-63; Ord. No. 01-98, § 5, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17B-32. - Notice of denial. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application he shall mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 6, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-33. - Appeal from denial. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city commission. Appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The city commission shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 7, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-34. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be required to tender a permit for a parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this ordinance [article]. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 8, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-35. - Copies to be sent to city officers. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(a)  The city manager; 
(b)  The fire chief; 
(c)  The director of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 9, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-36. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(a)  Starting time; 
(b)  Minimum speed; 
(c)  Maximum speed; 
(d)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(e)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(f)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(g)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this ordinance [article]. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 10, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-37. - Duties of permittee; permit to be carried. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 11, 11-4-63) 
Sec. 17B-38. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as therein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 63-102, § 13, 11-4-63) 
ARTICLE III. - PARADE, FESTIVAL, AND DEMONSTRATION PERMITS 

Sec. 17B-39. - Application to parades, festivals and demonstrations. 
This article applies to both demonstrations or festivals of over 15 people as set forth in section 17B-11 and to parades as defined in section 17B-18(c). The requirements of this article are in addition to those requirements contained in articles I and II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 3, 5-13-03) 
Sec. 17B-40. - Non-discrimination. 
No consideration may be given to the message of the event, nor to the content of speech, nor to the identity or associational relationships of the applicant, nor to any assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the proposed event. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 3, 5-13-03) 
Sec. 17B-41. - Insurance. 
The chief of police shall require that all proposed activities having a projected attendance of 10,000 persons or more (or actual attendance of 10,000 persons or more at an event held in the 24-month period immediately preceding the application) furnish a fully paid public liability damage insurance policy procured from a company licensed to do business in Georgia. This policy must protect the city, its officers, agents, the proposed event and its contractors from any and all claims, damages to property and or bodily injury which may result from or in connection with any of the operations carried on by the presenter of the proposed event and list the city as an additional named insured. The chief of police must receive a copy of the certificate of insurance no later than two weeks prior to the date of the proposed event. Insurance limit requirements are as follows: 
$1,000,000.00 bodily injury total; 
$500,000.00 bodily injury to any one person; 
$1,000,000.00 property damage. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 3, 5-13-03) 
Sec. 17B-42. - Basis for denial of permit. 
To the extent permitted by law, the chief of police may deny an application for a permit if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant. The chief of police, in granting or modifying the permit shall not give any consideration to the message of the proposed event, nor to the content of speech, nor to the identity or associational relationships of the applicant, nor to any assumptions or predications as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the proposed event. 
The chief of police may also deny an application for a permit on any of the following grounds: 
(a)  The application for a permit (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed; 
(b)  The applicant has not tendered the required application fee with the application or has not tendered the required insurance certificate, or sanitation deposit within the times prescribed; 
(c)  The application for a permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(d)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(e)  A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy; 
(f)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time and place; 
(g)  The conduct of the event will require the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the city; 
(h)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the event will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the areas surrounding the event; 
(i)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, of city employees or of the public; 
(j)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations of the city concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; 
(k)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, by this Code and ordinances of the city; 
(l)  The applicant has failed to complete payment of any sums required for a previously permitted event; 
(m)  The applicant has failed to substantially perform a cleanup plan that was made a condition of a previous permit; provided, the chief of police may not require the payment of arrears for previous activities or the restitution of damages from previous activities, as otherwise set forth in this section, unless the chief of police or his designee had mailed or delivered to the applicant a demand for such payment or restitution within 60 days after the ending date of such previous permitted event; 
(n)  The applicant plans to erect or place any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way but has not obtained advance approval from the city manager; 
(o)  The applicant plans to conduct the event in or adjacent to any areas zoned as residential, R-1 through R-4, between the times of 10:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m., as this article contemplates a group in excess of 15 persons and the city wishes to insure the tranquil enjoyment of the home. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 3, 5-13-03) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Solicitations and peddling in the streets, § 16-1 et seq.; public demonstrations, Ch. 17B; traffic generally, Ch. 20. 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Ogletree, 102 Ga. 293, 29 SE 749, for holding reversing earlier case between the same parties, and holding that where the duties of the police embrace the detection of defective sidewalks, notice of such defect to the police constitutes notice to the city. See Burrus vs. City of Columbus, 105 Ga. 42, 31 SE 124, for holding that no injunction will lie against the railroad for laying tracks on a city street owned by the state. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Street map—Adoption; effect. 
That certain map in the office of the department of engineering, entitled in the right-hand lower corner thereof "Official Street Map, Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia," is hereby adopted as the official street map for Columbus - Muscogee County, Georgia; the various streets, avenues, roads, drives and alleys named and shown on said map shall be officially known by said names and shall constitute the public streets, avenues, roads, drives and alleys of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. 
The "Official Street Map, Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia" shall be periodically amended by the department of engineering to include the addition of new streets accepted and/or the deletion of existing streets as approved by Columbus Council actions. 
(Ord. of 8-2-49, § 1; Ord. No. 09-57, § I, 11-24-09) 
Sec. 18-2. - Official street map—Where displayed. 
A copy of the official street map of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia shall be kept and displayed in the office of the department of engineering. 
(Ord. of 8-2-49, § 2; Ord. No. 09-57, § II, 11-24-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-57, § II, adopted Nov. 24, 2009, changed the title of § 18-2 from Same—Where displayed; signing to official street map—Where displayed. 
Sec. 18-2.1. - Street use map. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions are hereby established: 
COLLECTOR STREET. A street providing for traffic movement by the major arterials and local streets and direct access to abutting property. 
LIMITED ACCESS STREET. A street providing for traffic movement for expeditious movement for large volumes of through traffic between areas and across the city and not intended to provide land access service. 
MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET. A street that provides for through traffic movement between areas and across the city and direct access to abutting property; subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curb use. 
(b)  Adoption of street use map. * There is hereby adopted and established a new official street use map of the city, said map having been approved by the mapped streets committee of the City of Columbus on May 25, 1982. Said map is attached to Ordinance No. 82-45 and by this reference made a part of this paragraph of this section. [2] 
(c)  Streets covered in green. The streets that are covered in green on said map hereto attached are hereby ordained to be major arterial streets. 
(d)  Streets covered in yellow. The streets that are covered in yellow on said map hereto attached are hereby ordained to be collector streets. 
(e)  Streets covered in orange. The streets that are covered in orange on said map hereto attached are hereby ordained to be limited access streets. 
(f)  Minimum right-of-way widths. Major arterial streets as defined in subsection (a) hereof shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet, the center line of which shall be the center line of said streets as the same appear upon the official existing street use map of the City of Columbus. 
Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet, the center line of which shall be the center line of said streets as the same appear upon the official existing street use map of the City of Columbus. 
(g)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure or part thereof on any land located on said mapped streets. In the event permission is granted by the city commission for the issuance of a building permit, application for such permit shall be made within 100 days after the issuance of such permission and not thereafter. 
(h)  Section 69-1225 adopted by reference. The provisions of section 69-1225 of the Code of Georgia Annotated are hereby adopted by reference as a part hereof. 
(i)  Arterial and collector streets enumerated. The major arterial streets and collector streets color-coded on the official street use map dated June, 1982, are hereby enumerated and set forth in the schedule on file in the office of the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 68-196, §§ 1—5, 8-19-68; Ord. No. 69-1, § 1, 1-13-69; Ord. No. 69-98, § 1, 6-9-69; Ord. No. 70-199, §§ 1—4, 8-10-70; Ord. No. 82-45, §§ 1, 2, 6-17-82) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— The street use map is not included herein. 

Sec. 18-2.2. - Legal notice required for closing of streets or roadways. 
Whenever it is necessary for any purpose, to close a street or roadway in Columbus other than in cases of emergency, the public shall be notified by an advertisement in the news media in which ordinances are published, at least three days prior to the closing of such street or roadway stating the date on which such street or roadway closed and the duration of time such street or roadway shall be closed. 
(Ord. No. 72-210, § 1, 10-17-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-210, § 1, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 18-2.2 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 18-2.3. - Method of payment for street improvements. 
(a)  The payment of assessments for street improvements, whether the same be done by ordinance passed upon petition or ordinance without petition, shall be the same. The amount of each assessment shall be due upon the date set by the council; provided that the owner of any real estate assessed shall have the option of paying the assessment in one cash payment or one-tenth cash, and the balance in nine equal annual installments with interest at seven percent payable annually. Should any assessment or installment thereof become due and remain unpaid for a period of 30 days, the treasurer of the city shall issue execution against the parcel of land assessed for the total amount of said assessment unpaid, which execution shall be levied and enforced as provided by law. 
(b)  The provisions hereof shall be applicable to all street improvement ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted by council. 
(Ord. No. 74-168, §§ 1, 2, 10-29-74) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74-168, §§ 1, 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 18-2.3 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 18-3. - Acceptance of rights-of-way. 
In all cases where rights-of-way for street or road purposes are deeded to Columbus, Georgia, by either private landowners or governmental entities or any other entities, acceptance of such rights-of-way shall be consummated only by written resolution of the Council of Columbus; and no public labor or public funds shall be expended for the construction of streets or roads on such rights-of-way prior to the required formal acceptance by the Columbus council, nor shall any public official make a commitment for the future expenditure of such public funds or the future use of public labor prior to such acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 83-80, § 1, 9-27-83) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 83-80, enacted Sept. 27, 1983, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of § 1 of said ordinance as § 18-3 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 18-4—18-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 18-4, relative to leading or riding animals on sidewalks and breaking colts upon streets, and §§ 18-5—18-8, pertaining to appurtenances, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 561—563, 704, 766. 
Sec. 18-9. - Damaging or defacing property—Removing barriers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any street, sidewalk or city right-of-way within the city; or to use a closed portion of a street, sidewalk or city right-of-way for any purpose without proper authority; or for any person (except public employees charged with the duty) to move any obstruction officially placed as a barrier. 
(Ord. of 3-30-36, § 1; Ord. No. 87-174, 12-22-87) 
Cross reference— Offenses of injury to property, §§ 14-37—14-40; barricades on utility cut projects, § 18-64. 
Sec. 18-10. - Same—Lamps. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully break or injure any lamp or any part thereof, whether public or private property, already set, or which may hereafter be set up, for the purpose of lighting any of the streets or alleys or any part thereof in the city or extinguish any such lamp or remove the burner or bulb therefrom, or who shall knock down or remove any lamp or lamp post from the place where it is fixed. 
(Code 1914, § 775) 
Sec. 18-10.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-85, § I, adopted August 6, 2002, deleted former § 18-10.1, which pertained to driveways, erection, content, and fees for markers, and derived from Ord. No. 70-84, §§ 1—3, adopted April 6, 1970. 
Sec. 18-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed § 18-11, relative to enclosures for parks, derived from Code 1914, § 718. 
Sec. 18-12. - Excavating—Removing dirt. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any hole or excavation in any of the streets or haul or remove any dirt from any of the streets of this city, unless such person is duly authorized so to do by the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1914, § 765) 
Sec. 18-13. - Same—Gas and water cut-offs and meters, to avoid digging, approval of by superintendent of public works. 
All cut-offs of gas and water, also water meters on the service pipes of such gas and waterworks hereafter laid or put down in the city when laid on the streets shall be placed just within the outer edge of the sidewalk, next to the curbstone, and all such cut-offs and meters shall be properly and securely boxed in iron boxes in such a manner as may be approved by the superintendent of public works, so that the gas or water may be cut off and turned on to the customers without having to dig or displace the street or sidewalk or paving thereon. Such cut-offs and meters shall be put down under the approval of the superintendent of public works, and shall be of iron or metal approved by the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1914, § 627) 
Sec. 18-14. - Construction of curb inlets in radius portion of intersections. 
It shall be unlawful for any engineer, contractor, or person to construct storm water inlets in any curb that lies in the circular or radius portion of proposed or existing curbs and gutters that are parts of intersections where possible encroachment from loaded vehicular traffic may result. The city engineer shall be vested with authority to regulate and control such practices so as to minimize future damage to these structures from loaded vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 80-21, § 1, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 18-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-19, § 1, enacted Feb. 28, 1978, repealed § 18-15, pertaining to littering, derived from Code 1914, § 685; Ord. No. 65-44, § 1, adopted May 3, 1965; and Ord. No. 72-155, § 1, adopted July 18, 1972. 
Sec. 18-16. - Obstructing sidewalks—Merchandise; streets excepted. 
No person shall deposit, place or put, or suffer to be deposited, placed or put by any person in his employment, any goods, wares, firewood, boxes or other obstructions on any sidewalk except while actually removing the same into or out of some building or enclosure; nor shall any person suspend or cause to be suspended over any sidewalks, any goods, wares or merchandise in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of such sidewalk or annoy any person in passing along such sidewalk. 
(Code 1914, § 564, Ord. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 18-17. - Same—Lighting at night. 
Wherever necessity requires the obstruction of a street or sidewalk, the person so placing or leaving such obstruction shall, during the time such obstruction remains, place or cause to be placed or hung up or fixed securely on a post or otherwise, a lamp or lantern with good and sufficient light therein at each of the two corners of such obstruction or in such manner as clearly and plainly to show the place and extent occupied by such materials or obstructions. The person so placing or leaving or causing to be placed or left, any such obstructions at any of the places aforesaid, or the owners or proprietors of such material, shall light or cause to be lighted such lamp or lantern at or before dark in the evening in such manner as to reasonably suppose it shall continue to burn until daylight and such lamp or lantern shall have a red color or covered so as to cast a red light; provided the provisions of this section shall in no case apply to vehicles of any kind in daily use; and, provided, further, this section shall in no case apply to tools, implements or materials, the property of the city, and temporarily placed in the streets or public ways by employees of the city while engaged in work on the streets or public ways. 
(Code 1914, § 707) 
Sec. 18-18. - Same—Keeping open; duty of police. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the policemen of the city to keep the streets and sidewalks thereof open and free for public passage and travel and for that purpose they may order the dispersal of any assemblage of persons that may be obstructing or interfering with such passage or travel. Any person refusing to obey such order or continuing such obstruction or interference shall be deemed guilty of obstructing the sidewalk or street and shall be liable to arrest. 
(Code 1914, § 567) 
Sec. 18-19. - Planting trees; species prohibited; substitution of other species. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted in or on any of the streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, sidewalks or cemeteries of the city any chinaberry, mulberry or sycamore trees, provided, any fine imposed hereunder may be remitted by the recorder when the person so fined shall remove the trees so planted and substitute therefor an oak or elm tree or any other tree not prohibited by this section, within the period to be named by the recorder. 
(Code 1914, § 692) 
Sec. 18-20. - Poles, etc.—Painting; keeping in repair. 
All telegraph, telephone, electric light, fire alarm, telegraph or other poles now erected, or which may hereafter be erected, in the streets of the city, shall be painted and shall be kept in good repair. The superintendent of public works may at any time notify the owners to paint or repair the same, which shall be done within ten days from such notice. 
(Code 1914, § 689) 
Sec. 18-21. - Same—Utility—To display company name. 
Telegraph, telephone, electric or other company using poles on the streets, alleys or other property of the city are required to mark each pole plainly, with the name or initial of such company stencilled on same. 
(Code 1914, § 690) 
Sec. 18-22. - Same—Same—Guy wires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall erect or maintain any pole line for carrying wires in the city to attach or maintain any guy wire at a less distance than 15 feet above the ground unless such guy wire shall be enclosed in an iron pipe or in a wooden box not less than three inches in diameter, or be bolted to a timber not less than three inches square with rounded corners. 
(Code 1914, § 691) 
Sec. 18-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 59-51, enacted September 14, 1959, and effective October 16, 1959, repealed § 18-23 in its entirety. Section 18-23 was derived from the Code of 1914, § 708 pertaining to sign construction and regulations of same. 
Sec. 18-24. - Skating in roadways prohibited. 
Skating or playing, and the use of skateboards, by persons of any age, in the roadways of the city that is, in those portions of the streets of the city used or intended for vehicular traffic, is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-3-31, § 1; Ord. No. 78-3, § 1, 1-10-78) 
Sec. 18-25. - Skating on certain sidewalks prohibited. 
Skating, and the use of skateboards, by persons of any age, is hereby prohibited on the sidewalks of the following named streets and parts of streets in the city: Front Avenue from Ninth Street to Fourteenth Street, Broadway from Ninth Street to Fifteenth Street, First Avenue from Tenth Street to Sixteenth Street, Dillingham Street, Warren Avenue, and Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth, Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Streets west of First Avenue. 
(Ord. of 2-3-31, § 2; Ord. No. 78-3, § 2, 1-10-78) 
Sec. 18-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, enacted June 18, 1978, repealed § 18-26 which prohibited skating and the use of skateboards on the sidewalks by persons 15 years of age or over. Said section was derived from Ord. of Feb. 3, 1931, § 3, and Ord. No. 78-3, § 3, adopted Jan. 10, 1978. 
Sec. 18-27. - Crossing of driveways, roadways by skaters. 
Outside of the prohibited district set forth in section 18-25 hereof, persons under 15 years of age, in their regular process of skating along the sidewalks, may cross private driveways, and may also cross the roadways at the regular street intersections. 
(Ord. of 2-3-31, § 4) 
Sec. 18-28. - Soiling clothes; carrying unclean objects. 
No person shall use any handcart, or truck, or transport any ladder, piping, lumber, paint or whitewash brush and bucket or any other article or thing along and on the sidewalks and street crossings of the city, which tends to or is liable to damage the person or clothing of any person on the sidewalk or crossing, but all such articles or things shall be transported or carried in the streets and off the sidewalks and crossings. 
(Code 1914, § 684) 
Sec. 18-29. - Transacting business, obstructing—Not permitted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except as hereinafter set forth, to transact business in, or to do work in, or to obstruct any part of, the public streets, sidewalks or parkways in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly place any articles or items in or on the city right-of-way that constitutes a nuisance or prevents the safe and free flow of traffic. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sit or stand in or on the public right-of-way so as to constitute a nuisance and prevent the safe and free flow of traffic. This provision shall not apply to those lawfully assembled for the purpose of public demonstration pursuant to this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-4-43, § 1; Ord. No. 10-46, § 1, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 18-30. - Same—Exclusion from provisions. 
The provisions of the preceding section are not applicable to public utilities or the public authorities necessarily operating in, or doing work in, or using, the public streets, sidewalks or parkways; nor is it intended to prevent the customary use of the streets, sidewalks or parkways, for the delivery or receipt of merchandise or other goods or materials to or from places abutting such streets, sidewalks or parkways; nor to prevent the removal of objects and materials from the streets, sidewalks or parkways; nor to prevent the sale of newspapers on the public sidewalks; nor to prevent the peddling of produce and ice cream on the public streets; nor to prohibit the doing of any act in a case involving both necessity and pressing emergency; but the transaction of any business referred to in this section shall be subject to all ordinances of the city regulating the operation of such business. 
(Ord. of 5-4-43, § 2) 
Sec. 18-31. - Same—Exceptions, restrictions, by commission. 
The commission of the city may, by resolution, make exceptions to the restrictions contained in sections 18-29, 18-30 and 18-31, for a limited period, when it appears that such action is necessary or in the interest of the general public welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-4-43, § 3) 
Sec. 18-32. - Same—Filling station—Installations. 
No person shall install in the streets, parks or sidewalks of the city any station or equipment for dispensing air or water or selling gasoline or oil, nor install any station for air or water for automobiles, nor install equipment for conducting any other business in the streets or in the parks or on the sidewalks of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-11-22, § 1) 
Sec. 18-33. - Same—Same—Operation. 
No person shall own, maintain, or operate any gasoline filling station, any air, oil or water station for automobiles, or to install or have in the streets or on the sidewalks or in the parks of the city any stand or equipment for the operation of any other business. 
(Ord. of 10-11-22, § 2) 
Sec. 18-34. - Same—Same—Removal. 
All such businesses and the stands or equipment for the conduct thereof, as enumerated in the two preceding sections, so installed and operating shall be removed immediately from the streets, sidewalks and parks of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-11-22, § 3) 
Sec. 18-34.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-11, adopted Feb. 10, 1998, repealed § 18-34.1 in its entirety. Former § 18-34.1 pertained to signs on rights-of-way of public streets and thoroughfares; exceptions and derived from Ord. No. 80-84, § 3, adopted July 15, 1980; Ord. No. 80-104, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 1980; Ord. No. 85-85, adopted July 30, 1985; Ord. No. 97-8, adopted Jan. 21, 1997; and Ord. No. 97-114, adopted Oct. 21, 1997. 
ARTICLE II. - WORK PERFORMED ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The title of Art. II, formerly "Curbing, paving, etc., requirements, " was changed by § 1 of Ord. No. 91-50, adopted June 18, 1991. 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Ogletree, 102 Ga. 293, 29 SE 749, for holding reversing earlier case between the same parties, and holding that city must maintain streets in annexed territory whether or not taxes from such territorial loan are sufficient to maintain such streets. 

Sec. 18-35. - Permit—Required; scope. 
(a)  Any person, contractors included, who desires to perform any work on publicly owned rights-of-way and/or properties to include, but not exclusive to, the installation, construction, modification, planting, and/or removal of walks, sidewalks, steps, driveways, streets, roadways, aprons, curbs, curbing, gutters, copings, retaining walls, drainage structures, irrigation systems, plantings, landscaping, or other related work shall make application with plans to the city and obtain approval and a permit therefor before any work is commenced. 
(b)  The requirements as stipulated in the above preceding sentence shall also apply to any changes, alterations or additions to any existing installations on city or public property, rights-of-way or streets. This shall also apply to any alterations or cutting of existing curbing for driveways or driveway aprons on city or public property. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 1; Ord. No. 91-50, § 2, 6-18-91) 
Sec. 18-36. - Same—Fee. 
A nonrefundable fee payment will be submitted with the plans and application based on the following fee schedule: 
(1)  General work, each, $50.00. 
(2)  Urban/rural driveways, each, $50.00. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 3; Ord. No. 91-50, § 3, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 97-140, § 3, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 01-31, § I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 06-101, § IV, 11-7-06) 
Sec. 18-37. - Drawings and details; may be required. 
When required by the city, the applicant for permit shall submit for approval all necessary drawings and details sufficient to indicate the nature and extent of work proposed. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 4) 
Sec. 18-38. - Performance; by whom. 
All installations or work on city or public property, of type stipulated in this article, shall be performed by a person holding the required business license. This will not apply to work performed by authorized city, county or state forces, or to authorized installations by a public utility company. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 2) 
Sec. 18-39. - Materials, methods, specifications; exceptions. 
The materials, methods of construction, details, specifications and other requirements for the various types of installations shall be in accordance with the standards of the city engineering department, and more specifically with the applicable provisions of the city's specifications referred to as "Division VIII, Detailed Specifications for Cement Concrete Curb, Cement Concrete Gutter, Combined Curb and Gutter of Cement Concrete, Granite Curb, Cement Concrete Sidewalks, and Cement Concrete Driveways." 
Paving on public property other than of concrete is not permitted for walks, drives, driveways or aprons unless unusual circumstances occur, in which case special permission must be obtained from the city before work is begun. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 5.) 
Sec. 18-40. - Grades, elevations, etc.; furnished by city; incidental work. 
No work shall be started until approval of line, grade and elevations are obtained from the city. The city engineering department will provide the required line, grade, and elevations, including property line locations bordering or abutting public property, and work shall be installed in accordance with and to the line, grade and elevations established by the city. The property line locations bordering public property established by the city are not to include property or lot corners. 
Minor alterations on city or public property which are requested such as curbing work, alterations to drainage installations, etc., which are not ordinarily performed by contractors, will be performed by the city upon request, at a nominal charge to applicant. This charge for the work shall be paid to the city at time of application for permit. The nominal charge shall not be in excess of the city's actual cost for materials and labor in installing the work or services. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 6) 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. McDaniel, 17 Ga. 823, 45 SE 59, for holding that city not liable for damages in regrading of street where there was no showing of detriment to land abutting thereon. 
Sec. 18-41. - Safety precautions. 
Ample safeguards for the safety of the public, pedestrians and vehicles shall be provided and maintained including all necessary barricades and protective equipment. Approved lighting shall be provided and maintained where and as required for all times other than daylight hours. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 7) 
Cross reference— Requirement that lights be provided where barricades or other paraphernalia are left in the streets at night, § 18-17. 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Sims, 94 Ga. 483, 20 SE 332, for holding that city is not liable for injury from obstruction in poorly lighted streets in that where city voluntarily undertakes to light streets it has no obligation as to the brightness of the light. See City of Columbus vs. Anglin, 120 Ga. 785, 48 SE 318, as to city's liability for defective sidewalks. 
Sec. 18-42. - Cleaning up. 
At completion there shall be a complete restoration of property and premises conforming with abutting conditions such as backfilling, final grading to proper levels and grade, restoration of any existing improvements, utilities, etc. Also, at completion the premises shall be left clean of all surplus materials and debris of every kind and removed from the site. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 8) 
Sec. 18-43. - Rejected work; removal. 
Any installation or work on city or public property, which has been rejected by the city as work not complying with the requirements of this article or not performed in an approved or acceptable manner shall be removed, at no expense to the city, not later than ten days after receipt of written notice from the city after which stated time each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense and subject to the penalties as stipulated in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-30-55, § 9) 
Sec. 18-44. - Procedures for street improvements. 
(A)  Creation of Priority List. 
(1)  Existing ordinances. There is hereby created a record to be maintained by the clerk of council and located in the office of the clerk of council, which said record shall be entitled "Street Improvement Priority List." Such record shall, in chronological order of their adoption, list all ordinances for paving, whether they be ordinances based upon petition or ordinances of council without petition which have heretofore been adopted by council prior to the adoption of this section and which are not, as of the date of this section, under contract for development. 
(2)  Additions to list. After the adoption of this section, whenever a petition to pave or improve a street is presented to council by the owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage on a street, a resolution will be prepared by the city attorney for action by the council receiving said petition and adding the project to the street improvement priority list in the next order of priority. Any councilor may propose a resolution adding any street improvement project, in lieu of actually calling for an ordinance, in which case, upon approval of said resolution, said project will be added to the street improvement priority list in the next order of priority. 
(B)  Special Exceptions. All street improvements to be paved or improved through any type of assessment against abutting property shall be made in accordance with the priority list heretofore authorized and created, and no deviation shall be made in the order of priority, unless special exception is approved by written resolution of council. Such special exception shall be granted on the following circumstances: 
(1)  It is to the contractual advantage of the government to include a lower priority project with the highest priority project on the list because of the proximity of the projects to each other. 
(2)  Preparatory work by the government, such as storm sewers not installed, has not been completed. Delay for this purpose shall in no event be longer than one year after the project reaches the top priority on the list and no paving project with less priority shall be contracted for after said year has elapsed. 
(3)  When federal or state appropriations cover part of the project on the priority list, the exception on the priority list may be granted to afford simultaneous development. 
(4)  Any ordinance heretofore adopted which has been repealed prior to the fourth day of September, 1979, may be placed on a priority list dating from the date of passage of the ordinance which was later repealed. 
(C)  Ordinance Procedure. 
(1)  File of proposed petition ordinances. All petitions which have been received and added to the street improvement priority list will be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of council until said project is ready for contract. 
(2)  Time for consideration and contracting. 
(a)  Confirmation of petition. After a project is ready for the advertisement for bids to contract and before a petition ordinance is to be considered by council, the director of the department of engineering shall confirm that there still remains on the petition, if the project is a petition project, petitioners owning more than 50 percent of the abutting frontage of the project, and the petition shall be amendable to include signatures needed to qualify. 
(b)  Call for ordinance. Upon report to council by the city manager that the project is ready for advertisement for bids and that the petition is in order with the requisite number of confirmed signatures of property owners owning more than 50 percent of the abutting frontage, if the project is a petition project, an ordinance may be called for the street improvement project. 
(c)  Advertisement for bids. Upon adoption of the ordinance, the city manager shall immediately advertise for bids to contract for the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, §§ 1—3, 9-4-79; Ord. No. 79-104, 9-18-79) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-99, adopted Sept. 4, 1979, was nonamendatory of the Code; hence, codification of sections 1—3 of said ordinance as § 18-14 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 18-45—18-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-53. - Address assignments. 
(a)  Address assignment. It shall be the sole responsibility of the Geographic Information Division (GIS) of the Department of Engineering of the Columbus-Consolidated Government to assign addresses and notify the appropriate agencies of such assignment. A copy of a plat as filed and recorded with the clerk of superior court shall be provided to the GIS division by the owner prior to any address assignment. A minimum of three business days will be required to process new addresses or changes to existing addresses. 
(b)  Private streets. Street names for private drives/streets as provided in the A-1 agricultural district of the zoning ordinance may only be utilized for single family residential developments that serve a minimum of three lots. The private street name will be utilized in assignment of addresses only. The use of private street names for address assignment shall not constitute acceptance of responsibility or liability for personal injury or property damage by the Columbus Consolidated Government. All street names must be reviewed and approved through the department of community and economic development prior to address assignments in order to prevent duplication or confusion with existing streets. The department of engineering will collect a fee of $125.00 per sign to post private drive/street name signs. They shall be blue in color and labeled as private along with the street name. 
In the case of apartment complexes or corporate entities, a private drive/street name may be utilized for addressing purposes provided it is reviewed and approved through the GIS Division and provided it meets the minimum safety requirements set forth below. The drive/street may not serve more than one business or complex and will be restricted to using a single name and number for the entire complex. 
In the interest of public safety for fire protection, a private drive/street must meet all of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The drive/street shall be clearly delineated with curb and gutter or a minimum five-foot shoulder for a distance of at least 50 feet measured from the edge of pavement of the public street. The drive/street may not have parking wells immediately adjacent thereto in this distance. 
(2)  The minimum width of paving or concrete shall be 15 feet. 
(3)  The minimum vertical clearance shall be 15 feet. 
(4)  A minimum radius of 50 feet shall be utilized for any horizontal curves. The width shall be widened to 20 feet in these curved areas. All curves should meet the requirements of the AASHTO guidelines, current edition. 
(5)  A minimum 50-foot tangent is needed between horizontal curves. 
(6)  Any bridge structures should be designed to carry a minimum of 67,000 pounds. 
(7)  Provide adequate utilities for fire protection. 
The approval of a private drive/street name for address assignment shall not constitute acceptance of responsibility or liability for maintenance of any private drive/street by Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(c)  Posting addresses. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of every building, mobile home or residence to have placed thereon in a place visible from the street (both private and public) numbers at least two inches high showing the official address number assigned to that location. Upon receiving notice from the GIS division that an address change is required, the owner or occupant will be required to remove the existing numbers and replace with the new numbers within 60 days of the date of the notice. Failure to post the correct address upon notice will be deemed a violation of this section. 
(d)  Violations. Any person violating this Code section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-85, § III, 8-6-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-85, § II, adopted August 6, 2002, deleted former § 18-53, which pertained to residences, mobile homes and businesses receiving mail, fire or police calls, and derived from Ord. No. 70-258, §§ 1—4, adopted October 5, 1970, and Ord. No. 83-21, § 1, adopted March 29, 1983. Section III of Ord. No. 02-85 enacted a new § 18-53 as set forth herein. 
Sec. 18-54. - [Honorary designating of streets or segments of streets.] 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the Columbus Council shall be authorized to designate by resolution existing streets or segments of existing streets in honor or memory of persons, living or deceased, upon recommendation of the Board of Honor for Distinguished Citizens pursuant to Columbus Code subsection 2-81(b). The board shall recommend an honorary designation by resolution, an official street name change by appropriate ordinance, or denial of the request. An honorary designation by resolution shall not change the numbering of buildings or official street addresses of the street or segment so designated. Upon such honorary designation, the traffic engineer shall be authorized to erect appropriate signage in a color distinguishable from standard street signage. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the naming of new streets pursuant to § 7.8.5 of the Unified Development Ordinance. All costs for such signage shall be paid by the applicant for the honorary designation. 
(Ord. No. 11-57, § 2, 11-8-11) 
Secs. 18-55—18-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REPAIR AND PATCH CUT WORK BY UTILITY COMPANIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 82-98, enacted Dec. 28, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of said ordinance as Ch. 18, Art. IV, is at the discretion of the editors. Specifically, the introductory paragraph of said ordinance is included herein as § 18-60, and §§ I—IV of the regulations promulgated by the department of engineering are included as §§ 18-61—18-64. 
Cross reference— Injury to or destruction of apparatus used in supplying public services, § 14-62.4; legal notice required for closing streets and roadways, § 18-2.2; excavations, §§ 18-12, 18-13; obstructing sidewalks, § 18-16 et seq.; utility poles, § 18-20 et seq.; obstructing public ways, § 18-29 et seq.; signs on rights-of-way, § 18-34.1; procedures for street improvements, § 18-44. 

Sec. 18-60. - Regulations adopted. 
The following regulations, prepared by the Department of Engineering of Columbus, Georgia, are hereby adopted and established for repair and patch cuts made on public rights-of-way by the utility companies in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 82-98, 12-28-82) 
Sec. 18-61. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to any and all maintenance, reconstruction, relocation or installation of any utility within the limits of city-owned rights-of-way requiring cutting and patching of any paved surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 82-98, 12-28-82) 
Sec. 18-62. - Application. 
(a)  Permit required; accompanying documents. Each utility desiring to make an open cut within the limits of the right-of-way will be required to obtain a permit from the city engineering department, located on the first floor, east wing of the Government Center. 
Permit application shall be accompanied by an 8½-inch by 11-inch plan view showing proposed limits of any new construction. Multiple cuts will be allowed when such cuts can be described at the same address location. 
(b)  Exceptions. The utility companies will be required to obtain a permit at least 48 hours before work is to begin, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Emergency cuts: In case of an emergency, the utility company will obtain a permit not later than one working day after the work has begun. 
(2)  Unforseen cuts which become necessary as a result of normal maintenance, reconstruction, relocation, or installation of utilities within the limits of the rights-of-way: The utility company will obtain a permit within one working day after the work has begun. 
(Ord. No. 82-98, 12-28-82) 
Sec. 18-63. - Design specifications. 
(a)  Roadways: 
(1)  All base material for patches on city streets shall be six inches thick, Class A, 3,000 p.s.i. concrete. An allowance of 1½ inches in depth shall be provided for appropriate asphaltic overlays. 
(2)  Asphalt will be 1½ inches, Type E mix unless a more suitable in-kind mix is specified for large cuts by the city engineer. 
(3)  The entire base area shall be tack-coated prior to any placement of asphalt. 
(4)  Patching will be permitted on days when weather is satisfactory. Placing concrete temperature shall be 35 degrees and rising, and placing asphalt temperature shall be 35 degrees and rising. 
(5)  All trench cuts shall be a minimum of 18 inches wide to allow room for mechanical compaction equipment. All backfill shall be tamped in six-inch lifts, to a minimum of 95 percent maximum dry density of a standard proctor. 
(6)  Ditches shall be cut an additional six inches wide on each side to a depth of 7½ inches to provide a concrete bridge to reduce differential settlement. 
(7)  All cuts shall be made so as to maintain square or rectangular configurations. No round cuts will be accepted. 
(8)  No cleated equipment is to be used on paved surfaces. Special care shall be taken to protect pavements from damage by equipment stabilizers. 
(9)  All excavated material shall be cleaned from pavement surfaces to the satisfaction of the field inspector by an approved method. 
(10)  Drawing Number E-905 shall be filed in the department of engineering for graphic details of patching specifications. 
(b)  Driveways: 
(1)  Residential driveways will be replaced with five-inch, Class A, 3,000 p.s.i. concrete. 
(2)  Commercial driveways will be replaced with six-inch, Class A, 3,000 p.s.i. concrete. 
(3)  Asphalt driveways will be sawed and replaced in a uniform manner. 
(4)  All driveways must be replaced with special care taken to satisfy property owners. Breakout limits shall be determined by utilities. In cases of disputes with property owners, the decision of the city engineer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 82-98, 12-28-82) 
Sec. 18-64. - Responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The utility company is responsible for maintaining warning devices and barricades on all utility cut projects until the cut is either permanently or temporarily repaired and opened to traffic. The warning devices shall be placed in accordance with Section 159 of the department of transportation's "Standard Specifications—Construction of Roads and Bridges," or latest revisions. The following exceptions are permitted for placement of advance construction site signing, which must begin: 
(1)  500 feet before construction sites or at the nearest intersection on streets whose posted speed limit is less than but not including 40 miles per hour; or 
(2)  1,000 feet before construction site on streets whose posted speed limit is 40 miles per hour or greater, but not including 50 miles per hour; or 
(3)  1,500 feet before construction sites on streets with posted speed limits of 50 miles per hour or greater. 
(b)  Each utility company shall furnish an emergency number where a responsible representative of the company can be reached after working hours and on weekends or holidays. This number shall be furnished to the directors of engineering, public works, and 911. The utility company shall be responsible for responding to emergencies promptly. 
(c)  Each utility company will be totally responsible for maintenance of utility cut on right-of-way for 12 months. The required maintenance period shall expire on the last day of the month, one year from the month in which the final repair of the utility was made. 
(d)  Utility companies shall repair all open cuts immediately following completion of construction with temporary patching material. Permanent patching material shall be placed no later than 30 calendar days following completion of temporary patch. The department of engineering shall be notified upon completion of permanent patching. Variances may be issued by the city engineer. 
(e)  Any damage or claim of damage from the general public due to utility repair or installation operations shall be the responsibility of the utility company. 
(f)  All utility companies shall be held responsible for insuring that all cuts are satisfactorily completed. Failure to comply will result in nonissuance of further permits. 
(g)  The utility companies shall be responsible for scope and quality of work performed by their subcontractors. Subcontractors shall be licensed in Columbus, bonded and insured. 
(Ord. No. 82-98, 12-28-82) 
Secs. 18-65—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ordinance No. 04-108, effective March 1, 2005 repealed Art. V, in its entirety. Former art. V pertained to Outdoor Cafes and derived from Ord. No. 99-24, effective April 29, 1999. Provisions previously codified herein can now be located in Ch. 3, Art. 2 of Appendix A. 

Secs. 18-71—18-76. - Reserved. 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION AND LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and taxes on the sale, use or possession of alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; billiard rooms and tables, § 14-62.3. 

ARTICLE I. - TAXATION GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See City of Columbus vs. Flournay and Epping, 65 Ga. 231, as to prohibition of assessment on the sale of cotton by Act of 1873. See City of Columbus vs. Muscogee Mfg. Co., 165 Ga. 259, 140 SE 860, for holding cotton warehouse which was not used exclusively for storing cotton was not tax exempt under the act of 1873. See McGee and Hatcher vs. City of Columbus, 69 Ga. 581, for holding that although tax on cotton sales is illegal, after voluntary payment the amount of the tax could not be recovered by the taxpayer. See Bass vs. City of Columbus, 30 Ga. 845, for holding that tax on railroad property outside of city is valid where such power is granted by the legislature. See Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company vs. City of Columbus, 189 Ga. 458, 6 SE (2d) 320, for holding that 1939 tax ordinance was void insofar as the tax on each separate grocery store of the A & P greatly exceeded the tax on each individual independent store. See Jones vs. City of Columbus, 25 Ga. 610, for holding that the city is authorized to discriminate as to the amount of tax on residents of the city and nonresidents for doing business in the city; and that the city is not authorized to levy a tax for the payment of bonds where the bonds were not authorized by the legislature. 

Sec. 19-01. - Taxing districts established; services considered in establishing tax liability. 
(a)  General Service District. The General Services District of Columbus, Georgia, consists of the total area of Muscogee County, and taxation for the General Services District shall be established based upon all services rendered by Columbus, Georgia, with the exception of fire protection, police protection and the operation of the public works department. 
(b)  Urban Services District 1. Urban Services District 1 shall consist of the territory which is described as Urban Services District 1 and 2 as of December 1, 1985. Urban Services District 1 shall also consist of Land Lots 277, 259 and 240 in the Number 19 Nances 772 GM; Land Lots 48 and 19 in the Number 8 Nances 772 GM; Land Lots 87, 88 and 89 in the Number 8 Nances 772 GM that comprised the former Town of Bibb City; and the following Land Lots in the Number 9 Edwards 1128 GM that comprise the following areas; the Muscogee Technology Park, being lots 71, 88, 89, 90, 91, and 102; that portion of 69 and 70 southeast of the Central of Georgia Railroad; that portion of 92, 100, and 101 south of Chattsworth Road; that portion of 124 and 125 southwest of 10 th Armored Division Road; that portion of 103, 104, 105, and 123 west of the Fort Benning United States Military Reservation; that portion of 74 and 87 north of the Fort Benning United States Military Reservation; and that portion of 74 west and north of the Fort Benning United States Military Reservation. 
(c)  Urban Services District 2. Urban Services District Number 2 consists of all the area of Columbus, Georgia, not described as Urban Services District 1, except the United States Military Reservation. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, §§ 1—4, 3-9-71; Ord. No. 72-82, § 1, 5-9-72; Ord. No. 72-86, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 73-48, §§ 1—4, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 73-49, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-73; Ord. No. 73-91, § 1, 6-28-73; Ord. No. 74-117, § 1, 6-25-74; Ord. No. 75-57, § 1, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 76-70, § 1, 6-8-76; Ord. No. 76-76, § 1, 6-15-76; Ord. No. 77-70, § 1, 6-14-77; Ord. No. 78-80, § 1, 7-5-78; Ord. No. 79-66, § 1, 6-22-79; Ord. No. 80-7, § 1, 6-26-80; Ord. No. 81-51, § 1, 6-16-81; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1, 6-17-82; Ord. No. 83-44, § 1, 6-21-83; Ord. No. 83-61, § 1, 7-19-83; Ord. No. 84-58, § 1, 6-21-84; Ord. No. 84-126, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 85-71, § 1, 6-27-8; Ord. No. 85-76, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-85; Ord. No. 85-77, § 1, 7-9-85; Ord. No. 85-141, §§ 1, 2, 12-31-85; Ord. No. 86-61, § 1, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 87-75, § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 88-67, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 89-71, § 1, 6-27-89; Ord. No. 90-55, § 1, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 91-45, § 1, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 92-54, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 93-47, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 96-59, § 1, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 01-64, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-01; Ord. No. 02-63, § 1, 6-27-02; Ord. No. 03-30, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 6-19-07) 
Charter reference— Levy of property tax, § 7-403. 
Secs. 19-1—19-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 19-1—19-10, pertaining to tax assessors, the tax review board, the board of tax appeals, duties of the city marshal in relation to taxes, taxpayers' oath, petition for reduction of tax assessments, bonds and sale of tax property acquired by the city. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 222—227, 230-a; Ord. of Aug. 14, 1951, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 69-235, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 1969; Ord. No. 69-236, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 1969; Ord. No. 69-260, § 1, adopted Dec. 29, 1969. 
Sec. 19-10.1. - Exemption of certain solar energy heating and cooling systems and machinery directly used in their manufacture from taxation. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority granted by Article VII, Section 1, paragraph IV of the Constitution of 1976 of the State of Georgia, ad valorem tax exemptions are hereby granted to the following types of tangible property: 
(1)  Tangible property used in a solar energy heating or cooling system. 
(2)  Tangible property consisting of machinery and equipment directly used in the manufacture of solar energy heating or cooling systems. 
(b)  The ad valorem tax exemption granted shall include all such taxes levied for state, local or school purposes. 
(c)  (1)  For the purposes of this section, "solar energy heating or cooling systems" shall mean and include all controls, tanks, pumps, heat exchanges, and other equipment used directly and exclusively for the conversion of solar energy for heating or cooling. Such systems shall not include walls, roofs or equipment that would ordinarily be contained in a similar structure not designed or modified to use solar energy for heating or cooling. 
(2)  For the purposes of this exemption, "heating" shall mean and include water heating and drying. 
(d)  The ad valorem tax exemption herein granted shall begin with the tax year 1977 and shall expire on July 1, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 77-62, §§ 1—5, 5-31-77) 
Editor's note— Section 19-10.1 is derived from Ord. No. 77-62, §§ 1—5, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code. 
Sec. 19-10.2. - When tax commissioner's books open for returns of tangible property. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to Columbus, Georgia by state law, in 1979 and all future years, the tax commissioner's books shall be open for returns of tangible property, including descriptions of real estate, for the purpose of assessment for taxes, between the first day of January and the first day of March. Such returns shall be made on oath as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 78-139, 12-19-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-139, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 19-10.2 at the discretion of the editors. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Hartsfield vs. C of Columbus, 109 Ga. 112, 34 SE 288, holds disabled Confederate soldier with required certificate from the Ordinary not amenable to penalty for doing business without a license under the city license tax ordinance. 

Sec. 19-11. - Occupational license revocation—Businesses affected with public welfare, types included. 
The occupations and places in the city included in these provisions for the revocation of licenses shall be those dealing in alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, or in any one or more of such beverages; the operation of public dance halls, "honky tonks," juke boxes; musical instruments played by placing coins in slots; tourist camps; the operation of taxicabs and similar public conveyances; public eating places when operated in connection with any of the places herein named or referred to; and any and all other places of public amusement or recreation, whether or not similar to the occupations enumerated. 
(Ord. of 7-14-42) 
Sec. 19-12. - Same—Causes; action by city commission. 
Whenever, in the discretion of the commission, it appears that any occupation herein enumerated or referred to in section 19-11 is so conducted as to provide a loitering place for women of disreputable character; or that such occupation is employing a number of women in excess of the number required for its legitimate business purposes; or that such occupation is being used as a meeting place for purpose of prostitution; or that any such place is disorderly, to the disturbance of any portion of the public; or that such place is conducted in violation of any state law or city ordinance; or that such place constitutes or tends to constitute a nuisance; or that any taxicab or similar public conveyance is used to transport prostitutes, or for the purpose of aiding in prostitution; the commission shall, in its discretion, adopt a resolution revoking the business license heretofore or hereafter granted by the city to conduct such offending occupation or place, or to operate such taxicab or similar conveyance. In the case of any occupation or instrumentality above enumerated or referred to which is conducted or operated as a mere privilege and not as a right, revocation of the license shall not be limited to or dependent upon the acts and conditions set forth in this section, and the license may be revoked with or without notice or hearing, and without the necessity of assigning cause therefor. In cases other than mere privileges, and where the law requires notice and hearing, before revoking a license pursuant to the provisions relative to revocation of licenses the commission shall provide reasonable notice and an opportunity for hearing. The resolution revoking any license may be adopted on one reading, and shall be effective immediately upon adoption. In revoking licenses, such revocation may be made applicable to any one or more of such occupations. 
(Ord. of 7-14-42, § 2.) 
Cross reference— For provisions relevant to the offense of loitering by prostitutes, see § 14-52. 
Sec. 19-13. - Same—Penalty after operation without a license. 
Any person who, in the city, conducts any place or pursues any occupation enumerated or referred to in sections 19-11 and 19-12, or operates any taxicab or similar conveyance, after the license to conduct or operate the same has been revoked as herein provided, shall, upon conviction before the recorder, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-14-42, § 3) 
Sec. 19-14. - License tax for persons renting city auditorium or the Trade and Convention Center. 
Any business renting the auditorium or the Trade and Convention Center for the purpose of selling merchandise or services shall be subject to the city ordinance covering business licenses and gross receipts tax. 
(Ord. No. 60-89, § 1, 10-17-60; Ord. No. 84-105, 11-13-84; Ord. No. 88-17, 2-23-88) 
Sec. 19-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 19-15, which pertained to the sale of products produced by Communist labor, was repealed by Ord. No. 84-105, enacted Nov. 13, 1984. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 62-119, §§ 1—4, enacted Nov. 12, 1962. 
Sec. 19-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 19-16, which required that stamping or imprinting be done within the city when required as evidence of payment of a license tax, was repealed by Ord. No. 84-105, enacted Nov. 13, 1984. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 64-10, §§ 1, 2, enacted March 2, 1964. 
Sec. 19-17. - Issuance of building permits, assessment of license fees for buildings or businesses conducted on land granted by city with remuneration to federal or state government or agencies, etc., thereof. 
No building permit shall be issued nor shall any license fee be assessed for any building or business conducted on any real estate granted by Columbus, Georgia without remuneration to the federal government or to the state government or to any agency or political subdivision thereof without the approval of the council, in regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 72-47, § 1, 4-4-72) 
Editor's note— Section 19-17 is derived from Ord. No. 72-47, § 1, which ordinance did not amend this Code. 
Cross reference— Buildings generally, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 19-18. - Ownership disclosure required in certain classifications. 
Effective immediately, every application for a business license, whether new or renewal, in certain business categories herein identified shall disclose as required the names and addresses of individual owners. These categories are as follows: Books, stationery and magazines (License Code 1300) [section 19-47 herein]); books, only in connection with a licensed business (License Code 1320) [section 19-47 herein]; books and magazines, wholesale (License Code 1325) [section 19-47 herein]; books and magazines, to include canvassers not in connection with other business (License Code 1340) [section 19-47 herein]; motion picture, electric theater, vaudeville, drive-in or individual speaker, or similar shows (License Code 5820) [section 19-47 herein]; and newsstand (License Code 6020) [section 19147 herein]. 
If the business is to be operated as a sole proprietorship, then the name of the individual and his current address at the time of application shall be disclosed on the business license application. If the business to be operated as a partnership, then the names and current addresses of all partners shall be disclosed on the business license application. 
If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the names and current addresses of all officers of the corporation and all shareholders holding more than ten percent of the shares of stock of the corporation shall be disclosed on the business license application. If any holder of more than ten percent of the shares of a corporation seeking a business license in one of the listed affected categories shall be another corporation, then the same provisions for disclosure of individual officers and shareholders shall apply to that corporation. It shall not be sufficient for any corporation to be listed on a business license application as a shareholder without disclosure of the officers of that corporation and the individual shareholders of more than ten percent of the stock of that corporation. 
If the names and/or addresses of any of the owners, officers of a corporation or shareholders of more than ten percent of the stock of a corporation change, the changes shall be reported to the revenue collection division of the department of finance of Columbus within 60 days of the change. 
The penalty for the setting forth of false names or addresses or for failure to notify the revenue collection division of changes in names or addresses within the 60-day period provided shall be that provided in Code 1959 for the making of false returns. 
(Ord. No. 77-115, § 1, 8-30-77) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 77-115, amended this Code by adding provisions designated as § 19-114.1, which provisions were redesignated § 19-18 by the editors for purposes of classification. 
Sec. 19-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-28, adopted April 9, 1996, repealed § 19-19 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to personal property taxes to be paid prior to issuance of business license and derived from Ord. No. 87-47, adopted April 21, 1987. 
Sec. 19-20. - Revocation of licenses of businesses in repeated violation of ordinances. 
(a)  Wherever the Columbus, Georgia Code does not otherwise provide for revocation of licenses to conduct business issued by the Consolidated Government, the following procedures for revocation are established for repeated violations of ordinances governing the operations of said businesses: Columbus Council, on the recommendation of one or more enforcement officials, is authorized to revoke the business licenses of those businesses in which owners or managers or other agents have been found guilty of or pled guilty or nolo contendere in recorder's court or any other court to one or more violations on two or more separate occasions of the provisions of ordinances governing the operations of businesses within a one-year period preceding said recommendation, and the failure to appear at two or more separate hearings for one or more citations shall be treated as two or more violations on two or more separate occasions; the revocation by the council shall be effective for two years following the date of its action, and no renewal of a revoked business license shall be made during this period and until all violations are corrected. 
(b)  A recommendation for revocation and the reasons therefor shall be written and signed by the enforcement official or officials and filed with the clerk of council who shall upon receipt thereof forward the same by written correspondence to the licensee; said notification shall set a time and date for a hearing of the recommendation by the Columbus Council which shall be at a regular meeting scheduled on a date at least two weeks from the date of mailing by the clerk. 
(c)  At the revocation hearing the license holder and the enforcement official or officials and any other interested persons or witnesses to relevant evidence will be heard; but a certified copy of the judicial record of a conviction or plea shall be prima facie evidence of the violations underlying the recommendation for revocation, and the determination of the Columbus Council on the issue of revocation will focus on the number of violations and the flagrancy or damage to the public interest indicated by their factual circumstances. 
(d)  No license shall be revoked until a majority vote of the mayor and council decides at the time of or subsequent to the hearing that said revocation is warranted because the past failure of the business or its agents to comply with the provisions of the ordinances regulating the business constitutes a deliberate indifference to compliance; nevertheless, the unexplained or unmitigated evidence of at least two violations within one year of the recommendation for revocation shall constitute sufficient grounds for a finding of deliberate indifference. 
(Ord. No. 95-61, §§ 1—4, 6-29-95) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-61, adopted June 29, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 19-20 was at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 81-29, enacted March 31, 1981, provided for amendment to this Code, but did not specify the manner thereof; hence, codification of §§ 1—9 of said ordinance as Art. III, §§ 19-21—19-29 is at the discretion of the editor. Section 10 of said Ord. No. 81-29 provided that the department of property appraisal be abolished as of the adoption date of said ordinance, March 31, 1981. 

Sec. 19-21. - Created; composition. 
In conformity with section 4-624 of the Charter of Columbus, Georgia, there is hereby established a board of tax assessors for the consolidated government, consisting of five members appointed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 88-40, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 19-22. - Appointment; commission. 
(a)  The order making an appointment to the board of tax assessors shall be regularly entered upon the record of the superior court of Muscogee County, Georgia. A certificate from the clerk of the superior court reciting the order, and stating that the person appointed has taken the oath required by law, shall constitute the commission of a member. No other or further commission shall be required. 
(b)  No individual may be appointed or reappointed to a board of tax assessors when the individual is related to a member of the governing authority of Columbus, Georgia, in one or more of the following degrees: 
(1)  Mother or mother-in-law; 
(2)  Father or father-in-law; 
(3)  Sister or sister-in-law; 
(4)  Brother or brother-in-law; 
(5)  Grandmother or grandmother by marriage; 
(6)  Grandfather or grandfather by marriage; 
(7)  Son or son-in-law; 
(8)  Daughter or daughter-in-law. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 2, 3-31-81) 
Sec. 19-23. - Terms of office; vacancies; removals. 
(a)  Each member of the board of tax assessors shall be appointed for a term of six years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. In conformity with Columbus Charter section 4-624, said terms of office shall be staggered initially as follows, with full six-year terms for each member thereafter: 

 
In case of a vacancy on the board at any time, whether caused by death, resignation, removal, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term and the appointment shall be made in the same manner as provided by law for the appointment of the members of the board. 
(b)  A member of the board of tax assessors may be removed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, only for cause shown for the failure to perform the duties or meet the qualifications imposed upon him by law. No member of the board who is also employed by Columbus, Georgia, as a staff appraiser may be removed by the appointing authority during his term of appointment until the member has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a judge of the superior court for recommendations by a judge of the superior court to the Council of Columbus, Georgia, for such removal. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 3, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 88-40, § 2, 4-29-88) 
Sec. 19-24. - Qualifications. 
No person shall serve as a member of the board of tax assessors who does not meet the qualifications set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-291, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 4, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 88-40, § 3, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 19-25. - Oaths. 
Each member of the board of tax assessors shall take an oath before the judge or the clerk of the superior court of Muscogee County, Georgia, to faithfully and impartially perform the duties imposed upon him by law. In addition he shall also take the oath required of all public officers. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 5, 3-31-81) 
Sec. 19-26. - Members of board of tax assessors ineligible to hold other office. 
No member of the board of tax assessors shall be eligible to hold any other state, county or municipal office during the time he holds this office. A member of the board may be reappointed to succeed himself as a member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 6, 3-31-81) 
Sec. 19-27. - Chief appraiser—Qualifications. 
The board of tax assessors shall designate as the chief appraiser of Columbus, Georgia, an appraiser IV, as such qualifications are established by state law. The chief appraiser shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for operation and functioning of Columbus, Georgia's, property appraisal staff; 
(2)  Certify and sign documents prepared by the staff; 
(3)  Implement procedures deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the staff; 
(4)  In his discretion, appoint an assistant or assistants; 
(5)  Perform all duties required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 7, 3-31-81) 
Sec. 19-28. - Same—To be member of board. 
The chief appraiser may be a member of the board of tax assessors. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 8, 3-31-81) 
Sec. 19-29. - Organization. 
There is hereby adopted by reference a table showing the relation between the board of tax assessors and the chief appraiser's staff, which is hereby made a part of this chapter as if fully incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 9, 3-31-81) 
Editor's note— The chart referred to in § 19-29 is not reproduced in this Code, but is on file and available for reference in the office of the council clerk. 
Secs. 19-30—19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS LICENSE AND OCCUPATION TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-97, adopted Oct. 10, 1995, amended this article to read as herein set out. Formerly Art. IV consisted of §§ 19-36—19-78, which pertained to business license and occupation tax and derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 94-72, adopted Oct. 4, 1994. 

Sec. 19-36. - Business license required; business license required for business dealings with the city. 
(a)  License required. For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in Columbus, Georgia (whether with a location in Columbus, Georgia, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-7), shall register and take out a license for said business, trade, profession, or occupation, which license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business. 
(b)  Business dealings with the city. Any person, club, organization, or their agents, employees, or representatives who wish to sell, barter, trade, build, pave, grade, haul, make studies, do planning, enter contracts, and any and all other kinds of businesses with the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia, or any of its governmental agencies, shall, prior to doing said business, obtain, secure, and maintain a current city business license from the Columbus Consolidated Government. This shall be required whether business is on a contract or verbal agreement and whether or not labor and materials or both is supplied. Failure on the part of any one to fully comply with this section shall place that person in full violation of the Columbus Consolidated Government business license ordinance, and shall cause an automatic forfeiture of any agreements or contracts, or business dealings between the Columbus Consolidated Government and the violators. The revenue collection officer is hereby directed to initiate legal action against the violators. If any of the persons, businesses or organizations who wish to do business with the city can prove that they have paid an occupational tax to another municipality where they have a location in Georgia and the persons, businesses or organizations do not have a location in Columbus, they will not owe the tax to the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-37. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Columbus" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "Columbus, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Columbus, Georgia." 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  Computed tax means the product of the occupation tax rate applying to a business in any given year multiplied by the gross receipts of the business for that year. 
(3)  Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
(4)  Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(5)  a. Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation to, the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income; and 
6.  Reimbursements of expenses that would be considered as normal expenses in the operation of a business. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(1), example being the various departments within a certain business; or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, receipt of charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
6.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
(6)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or delivery vehicles of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(7)  Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
(8)  Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
(9)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. "Practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(10)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. Section 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-38. - Fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $75.00 shall be required on all business license and occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal, or re-opening of those accounts. 
(b)  The City of Columbus may by ordinance impose a regulatory fee on those businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations which O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9 authorizes the city to regulate. The city may impose an annual regulatory fee if the business must apply yearly or if the city customarily performs investigation or inspection of the business as protection of the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or local building, health or safety code. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  An occupation tax shall be levied as the revenue producing component of the license fee structure. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 17-32, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 19-39. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Tax levied. An occupation tax shall be levied based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nation-wide averages derived from the "Statistics of Income Bulletin" as published by the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. For the purposes of this article, profitability ratios shall be derived from data for the most recent ten-year period for which data is available. Profitability ratios shall be revised by the finance department not later than November 1 of each year for use in the following calendar year. Each type of business shall be assigned to a profit class based on the profitability ratio for that business type. The occupational tax rate levied will be based on the profit class of the dominant line of the business as defined by the standard industrial classification system and published by the office of management and budget which are incorporated herein by the reference and are on file in the office of the director of finance. Gross receipts shall be defined as set forth in section 19-37(b)(5). 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule: 

 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require that a business pay occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the gross receipts. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states. 
(3)  The city shall not require a business license from those real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(4)  Occupation tax shall not be levied in any manner except as described in section 19-39. The computed tax may be modified in accordance with section 19-40. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-40. - Transition provisions. 
For the 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 tax years, no business shall be required to pay occupation tax in an amount greater than 200 percent of the actual or imputed occupation tax for that business for the full prior year. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-41. - Each line of business to be identified on business license. 
The business license of each business licensed by the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the revenue collection division and that line of business being imprinted by the revenue collection division upon the business license. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-42. - Businesses with no locations or offices in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no locations or offices in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Columbus and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Columbus for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-43. - The number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of business license and occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-44. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Persons engaged in professions as described in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c) paragraphs 1 through 18 shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts in combination with the profitability ratio as provided in section 19-39; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a person electing to pay $400.00 per practitioner shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the gross receipts of the practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This irrevocable election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-45. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-46. - Purpose of occupation tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-47. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such license shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said license and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year, and if delinquent shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Columbus in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the license shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The license certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the revenue collection officer and if any person, firm, corporation whose duty it is to obtain a license shall, after said license or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact, or offer to transact, in Columbus, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said license, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the recorder, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the revenue collection officer may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this article, attorneys regulated by the Georgia Supreme Court shall only be required to pay a fee or tax under this article based upon business conducted during the prior calendar year. Delinquency in payment by such professionals shall only attach upon failure to pay the required fee or tax based upon business conducted during the prior year by April 1 of the year following the transaction of such business. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 4-22-03) 
Sec. 19-48. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each Columbus location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in Columbus and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with locations or offices situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-49. - Exemption on grounds that business is a state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
No business shall be required to pay any occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee if the business is a state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-50. - Evidence of state licensure required if applicable; state license to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city license is issued. 
(b)  Each person who is subject to a city license and also is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-51. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business who is required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business license, show evidence of qualification. 
(b)  Any business who is required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-52. - Liability of officers and agents; license required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof any owner, officer, manager, or other individual operating the business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a license. Every person commencing business in Columbus after the first day of April of each year shall likewise obtain the license herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Columbus, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said license, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-53. - When license and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such license shall be for the calendar year 1996 and each succeeding calendar year thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business license and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1 of each year on the second day of April of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in Columbus after January 1 of each year shall obtain the license required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in Columbus any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said license shall be assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provision of this article. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other interest, civil and criminal penalties herein provided, and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The license certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the revenue collection officer; and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a license shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Columbus, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said license, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-54. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the recorder, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-55. - Revenue collection division and officer and inspectors classified as deputy marshal-license inspector; subpoena and arresting powers. 
The revenue collection division and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-license inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business license and occupation tax ordinance for 1996 (this article) and succeeding years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-56. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-57. - Business activities not covered by this article. 
The following business activities are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusinesses. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. Section 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. Section 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-55. 
(11)  Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(12)  Residential property rental business. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-58. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in section 19-39 hereof shall, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the revenue collection officer the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for current calendar year, the actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in a current calendar year to be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the termination of the year, in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, secretary or other officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the revenue collection officer of Columbus, on a form furnished by said revenue collection officer, a signed return, setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year, to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-59. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax, based on the estimates as set forth in section 19-58(b), shall be payable to the city, at the office of the treasurer, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year; provided, however that the taxpayer may have the following options as to payment of said tax: 
(1)  If the entire amount of the occupation tax, based on said estimate, is paid on or before April 1, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a discount of two percent of the amount of tax so paid, allowable at the time of such payment. No discount shall be allowed for any payment made after April 1. 
(2)  If instead of electing to pay, on or before April 1, the entire amount of the occupation tax based on said estimate, the taxpayer elects to pay said tax in deferred payments, said tax shall be paid in equal installments as follows: April 1, July 31, October 31, and April 1 of the succeeding year. Where a taxpayer fails to make any such quarterly payment on or before the date due for such payment, the entire remaining balance shall be considered delinquent. In such event a penalty equal to ten percent of the unpaid amount will be imposed in addition to all other interest, civil and criminal penalties herein provided. Any delinquency arising from failure to make a quarterly payment on or before the due date for such payment may be eliminated upon payment by the taxpayer of the past due installment and all penalties and interest. 
(3)  Interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or any fraction thereof will be charged on any amount of delinquent occupation tax, administrative fee or regulatory fee. Any such interest will be charged from the date of delinquency until the date of actual payment. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-60. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of Columbus in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager of executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid in equal installments as follows: April 1, July 31, October 31, and April 1 of the succeeding year. Where a taxpayer fails to make any such quarterly payment on or before the due date for such payment, the taxpayer shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in section 19-54 and section 19-59 herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-61. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business will have the gross receipts of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by the revenue collection officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-62. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  After the end of each year and on or before April 1 of the succeeding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the revenue collection officer, on a form furnished by said revenue collection officer, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the calendar year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupational tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 19-58(b), hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year, based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 19-58(b) hereof, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by Columbus. 
(d)  In computing the amount of tax due the city or the amount of the refund due the taxpayer, a taxpayer who has paid the amount of his estimate and been allowed the discount of two percent provided for in section 19-59, shall retain credit for the amount of such discount theretofore allowed. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-63. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential, and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be considered as "employees" for the purposes of this section. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-64. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the revenue collection officer of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The revenue collection officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Columbus, Georgia, and upon demand of the revenue collection officer such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the City of Columbus within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of license currently existing to do business in the City of Columbus. Adequate records shall be kept in the City of Columbus, Georgia, for examination by the revenue collection officer at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, the taxpayer shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in section 19-54 and section 19-59 herein. For the purposes of this section, the interest rate specified in section 19-59 shall be assessed from the date the deficiency is determined to have occurred to the date payment of the deficiency is made. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-65. - Licenses to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books, and submission of false information. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, or upon submission of any false information concerning the business license to any office of the consolidated government, any business license granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be revoked. Any licensee desiring to appeal shall request in writing a hearing before the Columbus Council within 30 days of the date of revocation. No new business license shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the finance department in accordance with provisions found in section 19-64. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 00-27, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 19-66. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after license revocation. 
Any person, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in Columbus after the license for said business has been revoked as above; any persons, their managers, agents or employees, hereby required to make returns, showing the amount of gross receipts and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-67. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the revenue collection officer, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or 
corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of Columbus and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof become delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the revenue collection officer upon the property of defendant located in Columbus, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of Columbus and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of Columbus and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax execution. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the revenue collection officer against any person defaulting on the license tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-68. - Amendment or repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation or other taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-69. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinances. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to take out license provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-70. - Administrative rules authorized. 
The finance director is authorized to promulgate such rules or regulations as are deemed necessary to administer the business license and occupation tax systems or to facilitate enforcement of the provisions of this article. All such rules or regulations shall be filed in the revenue collection office. All such rules or regulations shall have the same validity as the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-71. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the revenue collection office, police department and the sheriff's office to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the recorder's court. It is hereby made the further duty of the revenue collection officer, the special enforcement officer, the chief of police, the sheriff, and members of their departments, to inspect all licenses issued by the City of Columbus, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the license held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-72. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolutions which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-73. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioner of professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of professions. Such exemption or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-74. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-75. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-97, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 19-76. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, be, and the same are, hereby repealed. However, any license fee or tax liability of any person incurred prior to December 31, 1995 pursuant to ordinances repealed by this section shall continue in full force and effect until paid, and all enforcement provisions which now exist shall continue to be in full force and effect solely as to such unpaid liabilities incurred prior to December 31, 1995. 
Sec. 19-77. - Economic development incentives. 
The Council of Columbus, Georgia, declares its intent to attract and retain businesses which provide jobs to residents of Columbus, Georgia, and the surrounding area and to encourage trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities arising out of the operation out of Columbus, Georgia business locations. In furtherance of these economic development objectives and in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 48-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the occupation tax for qualifying businesses (as defined below) shall be modified in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A qualifying business (as defined below) will receive for a period of four consecutive calendar years, commencing the next calendar year following the commencement of operation of the new or expanded business, a credit against the occupation tax owed by the qualifying business in an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount by which the occupation tax payable each year during said four-year period exceeds the occupation tax owed by the qualifying business, if any, for the year immediately preceding the first year of the four-year period. 
(2)  A "qualifying business" as defined in this section shall mean a business whose relocation to Columbus, Georgia, or expansion in Columbus, Georgia, develops and promotes trade, commerce, industry, and employment opportunities for the public good and the general welfare of Columbus, Georgia, and the State of Georgia, the relocation or expansion of which would qualify for the issuance of bonds pursuant to Section 36-62-9 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and which the Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia, based upon said standards, determines by resolution duly adopted by the Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia to be a "qualifying business" for such occupation tax credit. 
(3)  The Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia, will send to the clerk of council, the director of finance and the occupation tax section copies of any such resolutions so adopted within 30 days after the adoption of the same. 
Sec. 19-78. - Home inspector and home inspection business—Defined. 
Home inspector means any person, whether incorporated or not, except an employee of a county, municipality, or political subdivision while engaged in the performance of the duties of his or her employment, who, for consideration, whether it be the dominant or a secondary part of his or her business or the business where they are employed, inspects and reports on the condition of any home or single family dwelling or the grounds, roof, exterior surface, garage or carport, structure, attic, basement or crawl space, electrical system, air-conditioning system, plumbing, on-site sewerage disposal, pool or hot tub, fireplace, kitchen, appliances, or any combination thereof for a prospective purchaser or seller. 
(Ord. No. 99-55, § 1, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 19-79. - Same—Prerequisites required. 
Upon the effective date of this section, any person performing home inspections in Columbus, Georgia as defined in section 19-78, whether subject to the provisions of Article IV, Chapter 19 of the Columbus Code or not, shall meet the following criteria and submit the criteria to the occupation tax section or its successors: 
(1)  Each person is required to present one of the following credentials: 
a.  Certification by the American Society of Home Inspectors (ASHI); or 
b.  Certification from the Council of American Building Officials/International Code Council (CABO/ICC); or 
c.  Certification for each system inspected from the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI); or 
d.  Certification from the Housing Inspection Foundation (HIF); or 
e.  Certification from the National Association of Property Inspectors (NAPI); or 
f.  Certification from the National Association of Home Inspectors, Inc. (NAHI); or 
g.  Certification from the American Inspectors Society (AIS). 
(2)  Upon renewal of business license, those persons who are certified by the above organizations shall present current documentation from the certifying organization that he or she is in good standing with the organization. Those inspectors who qualified other than being certified by ASHI, CABO/ICC, SBCCI, HIF, NAPI, NAHI, or AIS, shall present evidence of four hours of continuing education taken during the preceding 12 months upon renewal of business license. 
(3)  Each person shall have a current certificate of insurance for initial issue and renewal of license, of not less than the following coverage: 
a.  $100,000.00 general liability, and 
b.  Worker's compensation insurance coverage, (if applicable). 
(4)  Each person performing home inspection shall disclose to the consumer whether he or she has errors and omissions insurance and the limit of coverage. 
(5)  Each person shall have the following letters of recommendation upon initial issue of license: 
a.  One letter of recommendation from a bank or financial institution, and 
b.  Two letters of recommendation from an architect, engineer, building contractor, or other person connected with any construction related industry, on their business letterhead stationery. 
(Ord. No. 99-55, § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 01-66, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 02-81, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 19-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE LICENSE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 94-72, adopted October 4, 1994, repealed Ch. 19, Art. V, §§ 19-81—19-88 and added a new Ch. 19, Art. V to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 71-304, adopted December 14, 1971 as amended by ordinances which may be found in the Code Comparative Table or page 3055. 

Sec. 19-81. - Vehicle tags. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years hereafter, vehicle tags shall be upon all automobiles or trucks transporting or delivering merchandise, tools, or other articles in connection with any business having a permanent fixed location in Columbus. 
Vehicle tags will be replaced on lost or stolen tags and vehicles that are traded or demolished. 
After a replacement tag is issued pursuant hereof, it shall be illegal to operate a vehicle with the original tag for which replacement has been issued. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to personal vehicles of employees of licensed businesses, when transporting no merchandise or materials other than the employees' personal tools. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-82. - Application of provisions. 
The vehicle tags herein required shall apply to all of the above specified vehicles operating upon the streets of Columbus for business purposes, whether or not such vehicles are operated by the owners or users for themselves or for others. The vehicle tags will be issued only to businesses having a valid business license. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-83. - Duration, issuance, transfer of license; tag to be affixed to vehicle. 
Vehicle tags shall be issued for the calendar year and shall be issued by the revenue collection officer; and the owner of each vehicle herein specified shall procure vehicle tag and number from the revenue collection officer of the City of Columbus, the tag with number to be affixed by the licensee on the outer rear of the vehicle. No license provided for in this article shall be transferred more than one time during the year for which it is issued, except that licenses issued for automobiles carrying passengers for fare may be transferred as provided in the ordinance of the city regulating such vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-84. - When vehicle tag to be affixed; operation of vehicle without obtaining vehicle tag. 
All vehicle tags shall be affixed by March 1 each year. Any person who first begins operation upon the streets of the city after March 1 of each year hereafter, without first obtaining a vehicle tag shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $600.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, either or both in the discretion of the recorder. Payment of the license herein levied may be enforced by execution, in the manner, with all rights and remedies, provided by the ordinances and charter of Columbus, Georgia, and the laws of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-85. - Article provisions to remain in effect until changed by ordinance. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect from year to year until changed by future ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-86. - Severability of provisions. 
Should any action, paragraph, clause, classification, item or phrase of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the application to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-87. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or part of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-88. - Liability of officers, agents for failure to obtain license, pay taxes. 
All persons, firms or corporations subject to vehicle tags provided in this article shall be required to affix the necessary vehicle tag for said vehicle prescribed in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons, firms, or corporations shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to affix a vehicle tag. 
(Ord. No. 94-72, § 2, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 19-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF VENDORS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY DURING SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 19-90. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Terms which are defined in section 19-37 for purposes of Article IV shall have the same meanings in this article. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Right-of-way means any street, median, curb, sidewalk, easement, park, open space or any other property owned by the city. 
(2)  Special event means a fair, festival, show, or similar event located in Uptown Columbus, sponsored by a single organization, lasting at least four successive days, and open to all citizens for free or for an entry fee of not more than $15.00 per person. 
(3)  Uptown Columbus means the part of Columbus within the area bounded on the west by the Chattahoochee River, on the north by 14th Street; on the east by 10th Avenue, Victory Drive, and a line extending from the intersection of Lumpkin Boulevard and Victory Drive south to the Chattahoochee River; and on the south by the Chattahoochee River. 
(4)  Vendor means any person who sells food, beverages, arts, crafts, or any other goods from a location on the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-91. - Award of vending rights. 
(a)  Sponsors of special events may apply to the city manager's office for the exclusive rights to authorize vendors to operate in Uptown Columbus during the special events. The city manager's office shall establish procedures to govern the application process, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Identity of the sponsor. 
(2)  Identification of the beginning and ending dates of the special event. 
(3)  Submittal of a map identifying the approximate placement of each planned vending location. 
(4)  Identification of the approximate numbers of proposed vendors who will be selling in each of the following categories: 
(i)  Food and beverages; 
(ii)  Beverages only; 
(iii)  Arts and crafts; 
(iv)  Souvenirs; and 
(v)  Goods of any other type. 
(b)  The city manager's office shall review all submitted applications and shall submit those which are approved to city council for action. The city council may at its sole discretion elect to award exclusive vending rights to an applicant for the period of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-92. - Vendors prohibited from selling in the right-of-way except as authorized. 
(a)  During any special event for which a sponsor has been awarded exclusive vending rights pursuant to this article, no vendor shall operate in the right-of-way except with the express written permission of the sponsor, which shall be posted in plain view at each vending location. 
(b)  During any special event the sponsor of which has been awarded exclusive vending rights pursuant to this article, no vendor shall operate in any right-of-way outside Uptown Columbus. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any vendor authorized to operate permanently in a public facility or park. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-93. - Responsibilities of special event sponsor. 
Any special event sponsor who applies for and is awarded exclusive vending rights pursuant to this article shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Adequate provision shall be made for security and traffic control at no cost to the city. 
(2)  Adequate provision shall be made for garbage and waste collection at no cost to the city. 
(3)  Adequate provision shall be made for litter control at no cost to the city. 
(4)  Adequate provision shall be made for compliance with all applicable health, safety, building and fire codes at no cost to the city. 
(5)  Adequate provision shall be made for the placement and removal of portable toilets at no cost to the city. 
(6)  The sponsor shall take such actions as are necessary to assure that all rights-of-way used by the sponsor, by vendors authorized by the sponsor, or by participants in the special event are at the conclusion of the special event restored to a condition at least equal to that existing prior to the special event. 
(7)  The sponsor shall, not later than seven days before the first day of the special event, deliver to the finance department a list of all vendors the sponsor has authorized to operate during the special event, identifying the name of the individual responsible for each vending location, the individual's permanent residential address, and the category of sales for which the vendor is authorized. 
(8)  The sponsor shall issue all authorized vendors a certificate of authorization in a form acceptable to the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-94. - Obligations of vendor. 
Each vendor operating during a period in which exclusive vending rights have been awarded pursuant to this article shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The vendor shall obtain any and all permits and pay any and all taxes, license fees, permit fees or other levies which may apply to the vending location and which are not expressly waived herein. 
(2)  The vendor shall post in plain view at each vending location proof of authorization to operate, which shall be issued by the special event sponsor as provided herein. 
(3)  The vendor shall comply with all applicable health, safety, fire, building and alcohol code provisions. 
(4)  The vendor shall keep the vending location free of litter and debris. 
(5)  The vendor shall at the conclusion of the special event restore the vending location to a condition equaling that prior to the special event. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-95. - Regulatory fees levied. 
(a)  A regulatory fee shall be levied on all sponsors of special events who apply for and receive exclusive vending rights pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The regulatory fee for sponsors of special events of more than three but fewer than eight days duration shall be $7,500.00. 
(2)  The regulatory fee for sponsors of special events of eight or more days duration shall be $15,000.00. 
(b)  Vendors operating in conjunction with special events the sponsors of which pay the regulatory fee provided herein shall be relieved of any obligation to pay the occupation tax levied in section 19-39 on gross receipts earned at a properly authorized vending location during the special event. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-96. - Right of licensed businesses to operate. 
Nothing herein shall in any way impinge on the right of businesses properly licensed pursuant to section 19-36 to operate in the manner permitted by the license. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-97. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-98. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 19-99. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, be, and the same are, hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-39, § I, 5-14-96) 
ARTICLE VII. - LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 19-100. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied a local sales and use tax in the amount of one percent in accordance with the terms of Section 26A of the Georgia Retailers and Consumers Sales and Use Tax Act approved February 2, 1951 (Ga. Laws 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended, and specifically as amended by Ga. Laws 1975, p. 984, within the boundaries of each of the Urban Service Districts described in section 19-01 of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, (Ordinance No. 75-57 effective June 17, 1975) as such Urban Service Districts existed as of the date that said tax was approved in a referendum, to wit: September 11, 1975. 
(Ord. No. 75-98, § 1, 10-14-75) 
Sec. 19-101. - Administration and collection of tax. 
The local sales and use tax levied herein above shall be administered and collected by the state revenue commissioner for the use and benefit of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 75-98, § 1, 10-14-75) 
Secs. 19-102—19-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY EXCISE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, adopted Nov. 25, 1975, amended Ch. 19 by adding provisions designated as Art. VII, §§ 19-100—19-111. The editors redesignated such provisions as Art. VIII, §§ 19-110—19-120, in view of the fact that an Art. VII had previously been added to Ch. 19 by Ord. No. 75-98, enacted Oct. 14, 1975. 

Sec. 19-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
(a)  Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which Columbus is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
(b)  Operator. Any person operating a hotel in Columbus, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
(c)  Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
(d)  Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
(e)  Hotel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(f)  Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
(g)  Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(h)  Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
(i)  Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(j)  Columbus. The consolidated city-county government of Columbus, Georgia. 
(k)  Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(l)  Monthly period. Any one of the 12 calendar months. 
(m)  Due date. From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 75-145, § 1, 12-23-75; Ord. No. 96-6, § 1, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 19-111. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax in the amount of eight percent of the charge to the public upon the furnishing for value of any room or rooms or lodging or accommodations furnished by any person licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to Columbus for operating a hotel within the meaning of this article. In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51, this tax shall become effective on August 1, 2009; and prior to that time and prior to each fiscal year thereafter, the Columbus council shall adopt a budget plan specifying how the expenditure requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 will be met. Prior to August 1, 2009, the excise tax imposed by this section will continue to be imposed at a rate of seven percent. The tax imposed by this article shall be administered pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b) through (j) and House Bill 642, passed at the 2009 session of the Georgia General Assembly, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 91-66, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 91-73, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 96-34, 5-7-96; Ord. No. 97-48, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 05-53, § 1, 6-17-05; Ord. No. 09-33, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 19-112. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in Columbus, as provided in the next preceding section, and renting guest rooms in Columbus, not exempted under section 19-113 of this article shall collect a tax of three per centum on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 19-113. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(a)  Upon a permanent resident. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 19-114. - Registration of operator; form and contents; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in Columbus shall immediately register with the director of the department of finance of Columbus (hereinafter referred to as the "director"), on a form provided by said director. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 19-111, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the director may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 19-115. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the director monthly on or before the twentieth day of the next month following each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the director showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents; taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the director. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and paid and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction from the amount paid to the director, if said tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws, 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 75-145, § 2, 12-23-75; Ord. No. 96-6, § 2, 1-16-96) 
Sec. 19-116. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to Columbus by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The director or his designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the director. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 75-145, § 3, 12-23-75) 
Sec. 19-117. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in Columbus which are subject to tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 19-116 (c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the quarterly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 75-145, § 3, 12-23-75) 
Sec. 19-118. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of director. The director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in Columbus to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the director may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The director or any person authorized in writing by the director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the director may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the director when required by the director and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the director may require. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 19-119. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Sec. 19-120. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of Columbus to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the director showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by Columbus under this article, it may be offset by the director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the director, he will have three years from date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the director, the excess amount paid Columbus may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 75-126, § 1, 11-25-75) 
Secs. 19-121—19-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LICENSE FEES AND TAXES ON INSURERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 83-82, enacted Oct. 18, 1983, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—6 of said ordinance as Art. IX, §§ 19-131—19-136, is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 19-131. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within Columbus, Georgia in the amount of $150.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 19-132, which is operating on behalf of insurers within Columbus, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 1, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 84-47, § 1, 5-29-84) 
Sec. 19-132. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $52.50 per location, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 2, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 84-47, § 2, 5-29-84) 
Sec. 19-133. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 19-131 hereof, in the amount of $150.00 for each such location within Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 3, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 84-47, § 3, 5-29-84) 
Sec. 19-134. - Gross premiums tax imposed—On life insurers. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within Columbus, Georgia, in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 19-131 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 4, 10-18-83) 
Sec. 19-135. - Same—On all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. section 33-3-5, doing business within Columbus, Georgia, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 5, 10-18-83) 
Sec. 19-136. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 19-131, 19-132 and 19-133 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 1984 and on January 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 83-82, § 6, 10-18-83) 
Secs. 19-137—19-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LICENSE TAX ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-83, enacted Oct. 18, 1983, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—3 of said ordinance as Art. X, §§ 19-151—19-153, is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 19-151. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-152. - Financial institutions' business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93 (empowering counties to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions), there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the Georgia gross receipts, as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. sections 48-6-93 and 48-6-95, of said institutions. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93, the minimal annual amount of said business license tax shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 04-75, § 2, 8-17-04) 
Sec. 19-153. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within Columbus, Georgia, shall file a return of its gross receipts with Columbus, Georgia, on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of Code section 48-6-93, O.C.G.A. The taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 83-83, § 3, 10-18-83) 
Secs. 19-154—19-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 19-165. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-166. - Administrative authority. 
(a)  Authority. The director of finance shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The director of finance shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the director of finance may require. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-167. - Levy of tax. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city there is assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under Article I, Chapter 8 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when, and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the director of finance of the city and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is, greater. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-168. - Uses of tax proceeds. 
The projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this article are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(a)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce and tourism. 
(b)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects. 
(c)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subparagraph (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-169. - Exclusion from tax. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(a)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the state, 
(b)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the state and returns it outside the state. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-170. - Authorized deduction for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-171. - Date tax due, penalty and interest for delinquent payment. 
(a)  On or before the twentieth day of each month following July 1, 1996, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the director of finance for the city a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the director of finance the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-172. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-173. - Administrative determination of tax. 
(a)  If the director of finance is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the director of finance shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The director of finance or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the director of finance as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-174. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the director of finance shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the director of finance. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 19-173. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-175. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-176. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the director of finance or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid of a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-177. - Penalty of violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director of finance or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of July 1996 and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Columbus City Council. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 19-178. - Severability and repeal of ordinances in conflict. 
(a)  In the event any section, phrase, clause, or sentence of this article is deemed unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining sections, phrases, clauses, and sentences of this article which shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 20, Articles I through XIII, §§ 20-1—20-18.11, is derived from Ord. No. 71-198, §§ 1—19, enacted July 20, 1971. Former Chapter 20, §§ 20-1—20-120, pertaining to similar subject matter, was derived from numerous ordinances on file in the city clerk's office. As to motor vehicle licenses consult the general tax ordinance of the city which ordinance is enacted in each year and is not included in this Code. 
Cross reference— Rules governing the operation of vehicles for hire, see Ch. 21; provisions relevant to installing of automobile service stations on sidewalks or streets, § 18-33; disposition of stolen or abandoned property by police, § 17-6 et seq.; motor vehicle regulations at airport, § 7-9; regulation of the operation of vehicles in cemeteries, §§ 9-5, 9-6; creation of the noise in advertising from a vehicle as a nuisance, § 13-100; additional requirements that vehicles be equipped with mufflers, § 13-103; unnecessarily sounding horn in traffic, § 13-104; offense of drinking in vehicles, see § 14-5(f). 
State Law reference— Definitions of the words "ordinary diligence" and "ordinary negligence," Ga. Code, § 105-201; rule of the road, § 105-112; rules governing the operation of motor vehicles generally, Title 68. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-01. - Adoption by reference—Title 68A, "The Uniform Rules of the Road." 
(a)  Title 68A, which is known as "The Uniform Rules of the Road," as the same may from time to time be amended, be and the same is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  In citing violations of a provision of Title 68A, the citation which refers to the ordinance number of this enabling ordinance of the citation form shall be in such form as the one developed by the commission of the department of public safety of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 77-72, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-77) 
Editor's note— Section 20-01 is derived from Ord. No. 77-72, § 1, which ordinance did not expressly amend this Code. 
Sec. 20-02. - Same—Title 68E-301 through 68E-305, "Violation of the Motor Vehicle Safety Inspection Act." 
(a)  Title 68E-301 through 68E-305 which is known as "Violation of the Motor Vehicle Safety Inspection Act," as the same may from time to time be amended, be and the same is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  In citing violations of a provision of Title 68E-301 through 68E-305, the citation which refers to the ordinance number of this enabling ordinance of the citation form shall be in such form as the one developed by the commission of the department of public safety of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 1, 11-10-81) 
Sec. 20-03. - Same—Title 56-9915.2, "Penalties for Violation of Chapter 56-34B, the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act." 
(a)  Title 56-9915.2 which is known as "Penalties for Violation of Chapter 56-34B, the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act," as the same may from time to time be amended, be and the same is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  In citing violations of a provision of Title 56-9915.2, the citation which refers to the ordinance number of this enabling ordinance of the citation form shall be in such form as the one developed by the commission of the department of public safety of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-130, § 1, 11-10-81) 
Sec. 20-04. - Same—Section 16-7-29(a), Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(a)  Section 16-7-29(a), Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which defines the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle, as the same may, from time to time, be amended, is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a monetary fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed $25.00 for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed $75.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Ord. No. 87-112, 8-11-87) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-112, adopted Aug. 11, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as § 20-04 was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
Commercial construction equipment. Any wheeled or tracked construction equipment designed primarily for off road (non-licensed) use and designed, altered, maintained and used to handle, load/unload or manipulate earthwork, construction materials/debris and raw timber materials for hire and meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 8,000 pounds or more, 
(2)  Having an overall length of 20 feet or more, 
(3)  Having an overall height of eight feet six inches or more. 
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Curb. The edge of a public street, whether marked or understood. 
Large commercial trailers. Any trailer that is designed, altered, maintained and used to transport or handle materials, supplies, cargo, vehicles or people for hire and meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or more. 
(2)  Having an overall length of 25 feet or more. 
(3)  Having an overall height of eight feet six inches or more. 
(4)  Having two or more axles with more than two wheels per axle. 
Large commercial vehicles. Any vehicle that is designed, altered, maintained and used to transport or handle materials, supplies, cargo, vehicles or people for hire and meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 14,000 pounds or more, 
(2)  Having an overall length of 25 feet or more, 
(3)  Having an overall height of eight feet six inches or more. 
Limit lines. Lines on pavement defining ranking or parking spaces, safety, danger, directing, neutral zones and crosswalks. Where a certain hour is specified herein for the performance or nonperformance of an act, eastern standard time or other "time" then in use in the city, is intended. 
Parking pad. An area having a minimum parking space dimension of ten feet by 20 feet established for the purpose of parking a vehicle on private property constructed of a material capable of supporting the weight of said vehicle. Examples of suitable material are a well established grass turf, compacted soil, man-made matting, gravel, pavers, asphalt, concrete, etc. 
Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Rank. To place vehicles parallel to the curb. 
Residential driveway. A driving area/roadway having a minimum width of nine feet beginning at the edge of a public roadway extending across public right-of-way onto private property terminating at a parking pad having minimum dimension of 10 feet by 20 feet. The portion of said driveway located on public right-of-way shall be paved in accordance with City Code sections 18-35 through 18-43. The portion of said driveway located on private property is not required to be paved within residential districts. 
Small commercial trailers. Any trailer that is designed, altered, maintained and used to transport or handle materials, supplies, cargo, vehicles or people for hire and meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of less than 10,000 pounds, 
(2)  Having an overall length of less than 25 feet, 
(3)  Having an overall height of less than eight feet six inches, 
(4)  Having one or two axles with only two wheels per axle. 
Small commercial vehicles. Any vehicle or wheeled/tracked construction equipment that is designed, altered, maintained and used to transport or handle materials, supplies, cargo, vehicles or people for hire and meeting any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of less than 14,000 pounds, 
(2)  Having an overall length of less than 25 feet, 
(3)  Having an overall height of less than eight feet six inches. 
Traffic division. The traffic division of the police department of this city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this city. 
For other definitions, refer to Georgia Code Annotated, Section 68A-101 of the Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 1, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 73-165, § 1, 12-4-73; Ord. No. 75-48, § 1, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 78-65, § 5, 5-23-78; Ord. No. 87-126, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 99-52, § I, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 20-1.1. - Driving past police traffic control vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful, for the mere purpose of driving and without having any immediate destination, to drive a motor vehicle on the streets of Columbus, Georgia, past an identifiable law enforcement vehicle, placed for traffic control purposes, more than two times per hour traveling in the same direction; the violation shall occur when the same motor vehicle passes by the police control vehicle for the third time, and the driver of the motor vehicle at that time will be subject to citation. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, 6-1-93) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-40, adopted June 1, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 20-1.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 20-2.1. - Police administration. 
There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.2. - Duty of traffic division. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.3. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a 5-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent 5-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.4. - Traffic division to investigate accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.5. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.6. - Traffic accident reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.7. - Drivers files to be maintained. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(b)  Said division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such person suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Such records shall accumulate during at least a (5-year) period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent (5-year) period. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.8. - Traffic division to submit annual traffic-safety report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the (mayor). Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.9. - Traffic division to designate method of identifying funeral processions. 
The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant, the use of lights, or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify, the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.10. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)  The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The city traffic engineer shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.11. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police by and with the approval of the Columbus traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of Columbus and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The Columbus traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 3, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-2.12. - Courtesy parking tickets. 
(a)  The police department of Columbus, Georgia is hereby authorized to issue courtesy parking tickets rather than parking violation tickets to vehicles with out-of-state tags other than Russell County and Fort Benning personnel, and Georgia tags other than Muscogee, Harris, Chattahoochee, Talbot and Marion Counties. 
(b)  This authorization applies only to overtime parking and shall not be construed to authorize parking where it is otherwise illegal to park. 
(Ord. No. 75-105, §§ 1, 2, 10-28-75) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-105, §§ 1, 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 20-2.12 at the discretion of the editors. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-3.1. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-3.2—20-3.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-3.2—20-3.4, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, enacted July 20, 1971, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said sections required obedience to the traffic ordinance and to police and fire department officials. 
Sec. 20-3.5. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a cross walk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-3.6. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, county, or Columbus, Georgia, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance or by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-3.7, - 20-3.8. Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-3.7—20-3.8, relative to emergency vehicles, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-3.9. - Immediate notice of accident. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $25, $50, $100 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-3.10. - Written report of accident. 
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $25, $50, $100 or more shall within (5, 10) days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible and shall remain at the scene of such accident to furnish information to any police officer investigating such accident or shall give his name and address to the other party involved in such accident in the event the accident is not investigated by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 73-34, § 1, 3-13-73) 
Sec. 20-3.11. - When driver unable to report. 
(a)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in section 20-3.9. and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(b)  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in section 20-3.10 and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall within ten days after the accident make such report not made by the driver. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-3.12. - Public inspection of reports relating to accidents. 
(a)  All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police department or other governmental agency may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(b)  No written reports forwarded under the provisions of this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident except that the police department shall furnish upon demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law, and if such report has been made, the date, time and location of the accident, the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, and the investigating officers. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 4, 7-20-71) 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 20-4.1. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-4.2. - Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the State Highway Department of the State of Georgia or resolution or ordinance adopted by the legislative body of this city. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-4.3—20-4.9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-4.3—20-4.9, relative to official traffic-control devices, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, enacted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-4.10. - Authority to establish play streets. 
The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-4.11. - City traffic engineer to designate cross walks and establish safety zones. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, cross walks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-4.12. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(c)  Whenever any street has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all other rules consistent herewith, shall apply. 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven or parked as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver shall first ascertain that such movement can be made with safety. The driver of any vehicle in a parking lane turning into a movement lane shall yield the right-of-way to the movement lane. 
(2)  Upon a street which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the street is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane, or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the street, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 5, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 73-165, § 2, 12-4-73) 
ARTICLE V. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-5.1. - Decrease of state speed limits as a general rule. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the streets of the city is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit within the city shall be 30 miles per hour which speed so declared shall be effective at all times except as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 6, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-5.2. - Increasing or decreasing state speed limit in designated zones. 
(a)  Generally. Pursuant to Georgia Code 40, Article 9, section 40-6-183, Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, of the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, and on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, it is hereby determined that the speed permitted by state law and section 20-5.1. of this Code is greater than or less than that which is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets, roadways and parts thereof, designated by this section. The maximum speed limit herein set forth shall be in effect at all times unless otherwise designated by this section. 
(b)  Speed limit schedule. There is hereby adopted by reference a speed limit schedule of all streets, roadways and parts thereof, for which maximum speed limits have been established by this section. The speed limit schedule is not contained herein, but shall be on file and available for reference and public inspection in the office of the clerk of council and the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 91-94, § 1, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 05-2, § I, 1-4-05) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 91-94, adopted Sept. 24, 1991, deleted former §§ 20-5.2 and 20-5.3 in their entirety and enacted a new § 20-5.2 in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The deleted provisions pertained to decreasing or increasing the maximum speed limit on certain streets. For the derivation of such provisions, the reader is directed to the listing of ordinances in the Code Comparative Table beginning on page 3055. 
Sec. 20-5.3. - Streets designated for speed enforcement using radar and other speed detection devices. 
(a)  It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation and pursuant to permits from the Georgia Departments of Transportation and Public Safety that the streets and roadways enumerated by this section are authorized for speed enforcement using radar and other speed detection devices. 
(b)  There is hereby adopted by reference a schedule of all streets and roadways approved for speed enforcement using radar and other speed detection devices by this section. Such schedule is not contained herein, but shall be on file and available for reference in the office of the clerk of council and the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 91-95, § 1, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 05-3, § I, 1-4-05) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 20-5.2. 
ARTICLE VI. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 20-6.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 20-6.1 was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said section pertained to the required position and method of turning and was derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, adopted July 20, 1971, and Ord. No. 72-12, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 25, 1972. 
Sec. 20-6.2. - Authority to place and obedience to turning markers. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-6.3. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-6.4. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-6.5. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-6.6, - 20-6.7. Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-6.6 and 20-6.7 relative to the manner of giving left and right turns, stopping, starting and decreasing speed signals and the approval of signalling devices. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-6.8. - "U" Turns. 
(a)  Generally. No driver of a vehicle shall make a "U" turn, that is a turn of 180 degrees or more, in the streets of the city. This provision shall not prohibit "U" turns at street intersections except at those street intersections where "U" turns are specifically prohibited by ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Veterans Parkway. It shall be unlawful for any person to make U-turn maneuvers along the following described portions of the Veterans Parkway in the city; as described herewith: 
(1)  Southbound Veterans Parkway at Airport Thruway/54th Street. 
(2)  Northbound Veterans Parkway at Whitesville Road. 
(3)  All median openings along Veterans Parkway between Airport Thruway/54th Street and Whitesville Road. 
The U-turn prohibitions described in this subsection shall apply only on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights between the hours of 7 p.m. and 1 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 7, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 91-30, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-91) 
Sec. 20-6.9. - Left turns prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  Designated streets. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to make a left turn movement at the intersection of Farr Road and Ford Drive in the following described directions: 
(1)  Northbound Farr Road. 
(2)  Eastbound Ford Drive. 
(b)  Traffic-control signs. Official traffic-control signs indicating "No Left Turn" shall be erected along the designated areas described in subsection (a) herein. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-90, adopted Sept. 20, 1988, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1, 2 as § 20-6.9 was at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE VII. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

Sec. 20-7.1. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 8, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-7.2. - One-way streets and alleys. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 

 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 8, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 72-17, § 1, 2-15-72; Ord. No. 78-16, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 91-33, § 1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 98-66, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 03-84, § 1, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 4-8-14) 
Editor's note— Sec. 20-7.2 is derived basically from Ord. No. 71-198, § 8. Sources of additions and alterations to the schedule of one-way streets and alleys are indicated in the history notes following the portions affected. Sources of deletions are indicated in the history note at the end of the schedule following the reference to Ord. No. 71-198. 
Sec. 20-7.3. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such parkings, signs, barriers, or other devices so placed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 8, 7-20-71) 
ARTICLE VIII. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, RAILROAD CROSSINGS, ETC 

Sec. 20-8.1. - Through streets designated. 
Those streets and parts of streets described herein are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section. 

 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 9, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 71-290, § 5, 11-9-71; Ord. No. 76-12, § 2, 2-10-76; Ord. No. 76-113, § 1, 8-17-76; Ord. No. 76-132, § 1, 9-28-76; Ord. No. 78-108, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-78; Ord. No. 86-18, § 3, 2-25-86; Ord. No. 87-10, §§ 2, 3, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-68, § 2, 6-2-87; Ord. No. 90-16, § 3, 2-27-90) 
Editor's note— Sources of additions and alterations to the schedule in § 20-8.1 are indicated in the history notes following the portions affected. Sources of deletions are included in the history note at the end of the schedule, following the reference to Ord. No. 71-198. 
Sec. 20-8.1.1. - Through streets with right turn yield. 
Through streets at which the intersecting street may make a right turn movement after yielding to traffic on said through street. 

 

 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74-6, § 2, amended Ch. 20 by adding provisions designated as § 20-8.1(a). Such provisions were renumbered by the editors to maintain the numbering system used in this Code. 
Sec. 20-8.1.2. - Multi-way stops designated. 
Rights-of-way for the streets and parts of streets requiring multi-way stops described herein are hereby designated. Such assignments of right-of-way require a stop before proceeding through the intersection. 

 
Sec. 20-8.2. - Signs required at through streets. 
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 9, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-8.3—20-8.8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-8.3—20-8.8, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 9, adopted July 20, 1971, and Ord. No. 74-80, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 24, 1974, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said sections pertained to: Stop signs and yield signs; the manner of entering a through highway or stop intersection; emerging from an alley, driveway or building; obedience to signals indicating approach of train; and yielding right-of-way. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

Secs. 20-9.1, - 20-9.2. Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-9.1 and 20-9.2, relative to following fire apparatus and crossing fire hoses, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.3. - Processions; driving through, permission. 
No vehicle, except fire, police or ambulance vehicles, shall be driven through a procession, except by the permission of a police officer present. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.4. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.5. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.6. - When permits required for parades and processions. 
No procession or parade shall occupy, march or proceed along any street in Columbus except in compliance with Chapter 17B of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, said Chapter 17B controlling public demonstrations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-9.7—20-9.13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-9.7—20-9.13 were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971; Ord. No. 71-259, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1971; and Ord. No. 74-59, § 1, adopted March 26, 1974, and pertained to: Opening and closing vehicle doors; riding motorcycles, bicycles, etc.; clinging to vehicles; controlled-access roadways; and driving under the influence of liquor or drugs. 
Sec. 20-9.14. - Right side of road, slow vehicle. 
Drivers shall operate or drive vehicles on the portion of a highway to the right of the center thereof, except when the condition of the right side of such highway is such as to make the right side impassable. Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as close as possible to the right-hand curb. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-9.15 and 20-9.17, relative to emerging from an alley, driveway or building and reckless driving. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.16. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-9.17. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 20-9.15. 
Sec. 20-9.18. - Colliding with stationary objects. 
The operator of a motor vehicle at all times shall operate the vehicle in a manner which is safe for the condition on the highways, streets, alleys, driveways, bridges, viaducts, or underpasses, so they do not collide with stationary objects legally on or adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-9.19—20-9.22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-9.19—20-9.22 were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said sections, pertaining to changing direction as speed-hugging curb for right turn and requiring brakes, horns and mufflers, were derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.23. - TV sets; not to be located within view of driver. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in Columbus, Georgia, with a TV set installed in such vehicle where the same may be viewed by the driver thereof, while operating such vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install a TV set in any vehicle in such a place as would allow the same to be viewed by the operator of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-9.24, - 20-9.25. Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-9.24 and 20-9.25, relative to noise and sirens, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. 
Sec. 20-9.26. - Unauthorized riding position—Passengers. 
It shall be unlawful, while traveling on any public street, for any person to ride on the running board, fender, bumper or top of a motor-driven automobile or truck, or on any other part of such vehicle not designed for drivers or passengers. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.27. - Unauthorized riding position—Drivers. 
It shall be unlawful, while traveling on any public street, for any person to operate a motor-driven automobile or truck while any person is riding on its running board, fender, bumper or top, or on any other part of such vehicle not designed for drivers or passengers. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.28. - Fourteenth Street bridge. 
It shall be unlawful on the Fourteenth Street bridge across the Chattahoochee River for the operator of one motor vehicle to pass another motor vehicle in motion and traveling in the same direction. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.29. - In underpasses, definition. 
On that portion of any highway running through an underpass, and for a distance of 100 feet on each side of the underpass, it shall be unlawful for the operator of one motor vehicle to pass another motor vehicle in motion and traveling in the same direction. By "underpass" is meant the portion of a highway lying under a railroad track or tracks or under another highway or viaduct used as a highway. This section shall apply to underpasses hereafter constructed as well as those now in existence in the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 20-9.30, prohibiting passing in "no passing" zones, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978. Said section was derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.31. - Intersections. 
In any highway intersection, it shall be unlawful for the driver of one motor vehicle to pass another motor vehicle in motion and traveling in the same direction. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.32. - Overtaking another vehicle; stop required; duties of drivers; penalty for violation of section. 
The driver of a vehicle on a highway upon overtaking another vehicle operated in the same direction which has decreased its speed, or stopped for any reason, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such lead vehicle. Nothing herein shall relieve the driver of such lead vehicle from giving any signals required by law. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-21-71) 
Sec. 20-9.33. - Right-of-way-to right-hand vehicle; exception. 
When vehicles shall meet at an intersection, crossing, or merging of street, or at a cut-through across the center park or median at a divided street or highway, the vehicle approaching from the right-hand side of the other vehicle shall have the right-of-way; except as otherwise provided in this chapter and other ordinances; and except, also, that no provisions of this chapter shall be so construed as to give to the driver of a vehicle proceeding at an unlawful rate of speed the right-of-way over a vehicle proceeding at a lawful rate of speed. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.34. - Laying drags; defined, prohibited. 
No driver of any motor vehicle in Columbus, Georgia shall operate the vehicle upon the public streets, highways, public or private driveways, airport runways, parks, playgrounds, or parking lots, in such manner as to create a danger to persons or property by intentionally and unnecessarily causing the vehicle to move in a zigzag or circular course, or to gyrate or spin around, except to avoid collision or injury or damage. 
The offenses described herein shall be sufficiently identified on any traffic ticket, warrant, accusation or indictment when referred to as "laying drags." 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed § 20-9.35, prohibiting riding of motor vehicles on sidewalks, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, enacted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.36. - Age requirement for motor vehicle operation. 
No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.37. - State driver's license. 
The operator of a vehicle in Columbus, Georgia, shall have a valid state driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.38. - State license tag. 
No vehicle shall be operated in Columbus, Georgia, without valid state license tag. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.39. - Inspection sticker. 
No vehicle with a Georgia license shall be operated in Columbus, Georgia, without a valid motor vehicle inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.40. - Vehicle repair in street. 
No repair work on vehicles shall be done in streets. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.41. - Parking near, hours. 
Between sunset and sunrise it shall be unlawful to park or stop any automobile or other vehicle upon any unpaved road or street lying contiguous to municipal golf links. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 20-9.42, making it unlawful to leave a vehicle standing on any streets in the city with its motor running, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said section was derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, adopted July 20, 1971. 
Sec. 20-9.43. - Parking vehicles for sale on street. 
The standing of vehicles for sale is prohibited on any street within the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 10, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-9.44. - Driving on divided highways. 
Every vehicle driven on a divided highway shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic control devices or public safety officers. 
No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing space or at a crossover or intersection as established, unless specifically prohibited by an official traffic sign, signal or control device. 
(Ord. No. 75-48, § 2, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 10-5, § IV, 2-23-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, § IV, adopted Feb. 23, 2010, redesignated the former § 20-9.47 as § 20-9.44. 
Sec. 20-9.45. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-9.46. - General weight/length restrictions—City/county streets and roadways. 
All city/county streets and roadways shall have a general vehicle weight/length restriction of seven tons and 24 feet in length unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-23-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, § I, adopted Feb. 23, 2010 repealed the former § 20-9.46, and enacted a new § 20-9.46 as set out herein. The former § 20-9.46 pertained to thru truck routes; maximum weight, width, height and length limitations for trucks; authority to prohibit truck traffic on streets and avenues and derived from Ord. No. 74-45, §§ 1—6, 3-5-74; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83; Ord. No. 94-38, § 1, 5-3-94. 
Sec. 20-9.47. - Truck route system; thru truck routes; local truck routes; maximum weights, width, height and length limitations for trucks; authority to prohibit truck traffic on roadways. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the truck route system for Columbus Georgia is to regulate the streets and roadways on which commercial trucks and other vehicles are allowed to travel within the city limits. It is the intent of these regulations to establish two types of the truck routes for trucks to use. The first is to establish thru truck routes for trucks primarily traveling thru the city usually without a pickup or delivery within the city limits. The second is to establish local truck routes for trucks traveling within the city with pickups, deliveries, en route to headquarters, repairs or performing other business within the city limits. Trucks traveling along local truck routes shall use the highest street classifications and/or weight/length classification in the order of limited access/freeways to arterials to collector roadways to the nearest point of departure to their destination. Trucks traveling along arterial and collector roadways having the same weight and length restriction may travel in sequence of arterial to collector or collector to arterial. And to regulate streets and roadways establishing specific weights, length, width, height and other vehicle limitations to protect design life of city/county streets and roadways and the safety/welfare of the traveling public. 
(b)  Maximum weight limitations. The Georgia Department of Transportation regulates the weight limitations on all interstates and state routes and therefore, is not regulated by this Code section. All motor vehicles in excess of weight limitation as prescribed by the Georgia Department of Transportation, which apply to state and federal routes (O.C.G.A. tit. 32, ch. 6, art. 2) are prohibited from using any street in Columbus, Georgia, except when applicable Georgia Department of Transportation permits have been secured by vehicles which are in excess of the provisions contained in the state law before said vehicles will be allowed to travel on the streets and roadways of the city. 
(c)  Maximum width, height and length limitations. No vehicle using any public street within Columbus, Georgia, shall exceed a total outside width, including load thereon, of 102 inches, not including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; no vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches; no vehicle traveling on the Dwight D. Eisenhower system of interstate and defense highways unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 14 feet; no vehicle or combination of vehicles shall exceed a total length of 56 feet unless otherwise permitted by the Georgia Department of Transportation; single trip movements for necessary purposes of materials, objects or vehicle of dimensions which exceed the limits herein provided and which are of such nature that they cannot be readily dismantled or separated may be permitted, but only when applicable Georgia Department of Transportation permits have been secured. The state law provides that loads of poles, logs, lumber, structural steel, piping and timber may exceed the length fixed without requiring special permit. Truck lengths shall be measured in the following manner for maximum lengths: Single chassis vehicle's maximum length shall be measured from front bumper to rear bumper. Single chassis vehicles without rear bumpers shall be measured to the rear most permanently attached apparatus such as dump box, flat bed, enclosed body, lift gate, etc. Tractor trailer vehicle's maximum length shall be measured by the length of the trailer only not including the tractor. 
(d)  Emergency restrictions. When the director of engineering and the traffic engineering manager determine that an emergency situation has arisen wherein trucks are damaging or destroying streets that are not designed or constructed to withstand heavy truck traffic, the traffic engineering manager is authorized to prohibit truck traffic to alleviate the situation. Such prohibition shall be defined and official traffic signs erected designating the maximum gross weight of vehicles to include load thereon, and/or maximum length. The traffic engineering manager shall report the same to the city council for confirmation by ordinance within 30 days of such emergency actions. 
(e)  Exceptions to truck restrictions. Vehicles that are making pickups, deliveries or which have other specific business such as being en route to repairs or having headquarters not located on that specific street are exempt from this subsection provided that the driver can show proof of said business thru documents such as bills of lading. Trucks qualifying for trips defined by this exception shall use the truck route system using a route with the highest street classifications in the order of limited access/freeways to arterials to collector streets to the nearest point of departure to their destination. 
(f)  Enforcement. The truck restrictions enumerated by this Code shall be enforced by the Georgia Department of Public Safety and by the city public safety officers. Violations may be determined using weight and/or length measuring devices. A vehicle shall be considered in violation of a weight restriction should the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) certification exceeds the weight limitation of the roadway on which the vehicle is traveling and/or stopped for investigation by a public safety officer. 
(g)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating this section or any part thereof, shall, upon conviction before the city recorder, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code with the minimum fine being $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 12-39, §§ I, II, 8-28-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, §§ I, IV adopted Feb. 23, 2010, added a new § 20-9.47 as set out herein and redesignated the former § 20-9.47 as § 20-9.44 (See editor's note at § 20-9.44. 
Sec. 20-9.48. - Thru truck routes—City, state and federal streets and highways. 
Thru trucks not making a pickup, delivery or not having other specific business such as being in route to headquarters or to be repaired within the city limits of Columbus, Georgia shall travel only on streets and highways designated as thru truck routes. The thru truck routes are hereby established and designated in the table below with the weight/length restrictions for state and federal routes being controlled by the Georgia Department of Transportation as state statutory regulations. The thru truck routes belonging to the city have their weight/length restrictions enumerated in this table. Local truck traffic making pickups and drop offs are authorized to use the thru truck routes. 
Note: T = Tons, Ft. = Feet. 

 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-23-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, § I, adopted Feb. 23, 2010 repealed the former § 20-9.48, and enacted a new § 20-9.48 as set out herein. The former § 20-9.48 pertained to certain trucks prohibited by weight and/or length from using enumerated streets and derived from Ord. No. 76-67, § 1, 6-1-76; Ord. No. 76-79, § 1, 6-15-76; Ord. No. 76-82, § 1, 7-6-76; Ord. No. 76-135, 10-5-76; Ord. No. 78-79, § 1, 6-30-78; Ord. No. 79-36, § 1, 4-17-79; Ord. No. 79-118, 10-16-79; Ord. No. 86-125, § 1, 11-11-86; Ord. No. 91-71, § 1, 7-30-91; Ord. No. 93-83, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 94-38, § 2, 5-4-94; Ord. No. 96-84, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 06-30, § I, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 08-58, § I, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 09-64, § 1, 12-15-09. 
Sec. 20-9.49. - Local truck routes—City streets and roadways. 
Commercial trucks and any other vehicles making trips, pickups, deliveries, drop offs or other specified business within the city limits of Columbus, Georgia shall travel on streets and roadways designated as local truck routes. The local truck routes are hereby established and designated with the individual weight/length restrictions enumerated in the table below. 
Note: T = Tons, Ft. = Feet. 

 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 12-39, §§ III—V, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 20-9.50. - Structural restrictions—City/county streets and roadways. 
The city/county street network include roadway and drainage pipes, culvert and bridges that structurally do not support the same vehicle weights as do the streets and roadways of which they are an integral part. The Georgia Department of Transportation and/or the city conduct periodic inspections to determine the structural integrity of these street and roadway bridges and drainage structures. The director of engineering or designee shall have the authority to restrict vehicular traffic based on the weight restrictions recommended by these periodic inspections and other structural evaluations for the street and roadway bridges and drainage structures. The director of engineering shall maintain said reports for public inspection that were used to established specific roadway and/or structural restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § II, 2-23-10) 
Sec. 20-9.51. - Official truck route system map. 
The official truck route map for Columbus, Georgia is hereby established enumerating the thru truck routes, local truck routes and other streets and roadways with the weight/length restrictions indicated. The truck route system map for Columbus, Georgia is hereby made part of this section by reference with an official copy maintained on file at the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § III, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 12-39, §§ VI, 8-28-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, § III adopted Feb. 23, 2010, enacted provisions intended for use as § 20-9.50. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 20-9.51. 
ARTICLE X. - LIGHTS 

Sec. 20-10.1. - Lights; required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle on any street at night, that is from sunset to sunrise, unless such person shall display lights, attached to such vehicle, as follows: 
(1)  If an automobile, truck, tractor or similar conveyance, two headlights, showing white lights visible at least 200 feet in the direction in which it is proceeding; and one light on the left rear end of such vehicle, showing red to the rear; and a white light shining upon the license plate attached to the rear of the vehicle. 
(2)  If a motorcycle or motorized bicycle or motor scooter, a headlight visible at least 200 feet in the direction in which it is proceeding; and one light on the left rear end of such vehicle, showing red to the rear; and a white light shining upon the license plate attached to the rear of the vehicle. 
(3)  If a wagon, dray or similar nonmotorized vehicle, a light or lights visible from all directions, such light or lights to be attached underneath, on top, or on the side thereof. 
(4)  If a nonmotorized bicycle, one white light visible at least 200 feet in the direction which such bicycle is proceeding. 
(5)  This section, referring to lights, shall not apply to equestrians and led horses. 
(6)  When a vehicle is parked or ranked on a street at night, that is between sunset and sunrise, a light on the left rear end need not be burning, but in such case there must be affixed at such place an attachment which reflects red to the rear, visible for a distance of 200 feet when such attachment has light cast upon it from the headlights of an approaching vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 11, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-10.2. - Dimming. 
While approaching another vehicle coming from the opposite direction, the driver of any vehicle shall dim or shadow the rays of the headlights on his vehicle, so as to prevent the rays from dazzling or blinding the driver first dimming his lights. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 11, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-10.3. - Restrictions upon emergency lights. 
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle upon the streets of the city to display emergency lights except as set forth herein: 
(a)  Only units of the police department shall use blue lights. 
(b)  Only units of the fire department and ambulances shall use red lights. 
(c)  Only units of other public utilities shall use amber lights. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 11, 7-20-71) 
ARTICLE XI. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES 

Secs. 20-11.1—20-11.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-11.1—20-11.5 and 20-11.7—20-11.10, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 12, adopted July 20, 1971. Said sections pertained to pedestrian's rights and duties and provided that drivers should exercise due care with regard to pedestrians. 
Sec. 20-11.6. - Prohibited crossing. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk (in the central traffic district or) in any business district. 
(c)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any through street or parkways. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross diagonally pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for pedestrians to cross streets at street level where overhead crosswalks are available. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 12, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-11.7—20-11.10. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 20-11.1 
ARTICLE XII. - REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES 

Sec. 20-12.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 20-12.1, 20-12.3, 20-12.4, 20-12.7 and 20-12.10, derived from Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, adopted July 20, 1971. Said sections dealt with the applicability of traffic laws to persons riding bicycles, the manner of riding bicycles generally, carrying articles on bicycles and required lamps and brakes on bicycles. 
Sec. 20-12.2. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, 7-20-71) 
Secs. 20-12.3, - 20-12.4. Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 20-12.1. 
Sec. 20-12.5. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-12.6. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-12.7. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 20-12.1. 
Sec. 20-12.8. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-12.9. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 13, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-12.10. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 20-12.1. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PARKING, RANKING, STOPPING 

Sec. 20-13.1. - Indicated areas; signs, markers, paint. 
It shall be unlawful to rank or park any vehicle in the streets except as indicated by the limit lines, signs or targets painted or located thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.2. - Unlawful to leave children under ten unattended longer than five minutes; police authority; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Unattended children. It shall be unlawful for any person having control of any vehicle within the city limits to park or rank said vehicle for a period longer than five minutes, leaving within said vehicle any child under the age of ten years unless said person leaves with said child some person ten years of age or older. 
(b)  Police authority. That any member of the police department of the city is authorized to use such force as may be necessary in his judgment to remove any such child found in any vehicle in violation of this section from said vehicle, if in his judgment it is in the best interest of said child. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person volating this section shall, upon conviction before the recorder of Columbus, Georgia, be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.3. - Proximity to curb. 
Whenever no limit lines, signs, or targets appear to indicate the manner of ranking or parking, all vehicles shall be ranked with their right wheels within 12 inches of the right curb, or left wheel within 12 inches of the left curb, when parking next to a median or a one-way street. 
The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as established by section 20-16.11. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 00-35, § 1, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 20-13.4. - Stopping in street; when permitted. 
Except when parked, ranked or stopped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city, no vehicle shall stop in any street unless in emergency to allow a pedestrian or another vehicle to cross its path or unless held up by traffic, or unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.5. - Long vehicles; time. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle exceeding 25 feet in length parked or ranked in the same space on any public street in the city for a longer period continuously than two hours, either day or night. The word "vehicle" shall include trucks, buses and all other automobiles, public-service and private. In computing the length of a vehicle, bumpers and other projections shall be included; provided, however, that school buses, bookmobiles, traveling museum units and other service type vehicles may be allowed to park on public streets, provided parking locations are approved by the Columbus Police Department for the parking of such vehicles. 
(b)  Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the east and west side of Fifth Avenue lying between the north curb of 10th Street and the south curb of 12th Street between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 79-97, § 1, 8-28-79) 
Sec. 20-13.6. - Drays on Broad Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a dray or to allow a public dray to stand on Broad Street between Ninth Street and Fourteenth Street, except while engaged in loading or unloading. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.7. - Passengers in parking meter zones. 
In all parking meter zones in the city it shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle discharging or picking up passengers to stop in a street comprised in such zones except in parking meter spaces or in regularly designated limit lines marked in white for a longer period of time than actually necessary to discharge or pick up passengers. Such period of time shall in no instance exceed one minute. In all such cases an operator must remain at the steering wheel and keep the engine running. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.8. - Red flag and light. 
Any vehicle with any part of its load projecting more than five feet beyond the front or rear of the body of such vehicle shall be provided with a red flag by day and a red light at night on the extreme end of any such projection. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.9. - Protruding articles. 
No vehicle, while on a highway, shall have any implements, objects or material of any sort protruding or hanging beyond the side or sides of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 14, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-13.10. - Commercial vehicles and construction equipment in residential districts. 
(a)  Purpose: The intent of this section is to regulate small commercial vehicles, small commercial trailers, large commercial vehicles, large commercial trailers and commercial construction equipment which operate and park within residential districts. Residential districts typically have roadways and driveways designed for local access of passenger type vehicles. Large commercial vehicles and large commercial trailers cannot easily maneuver and park on public streets without causing damage to roadways and sight distance restrictions. Commercial construction equipment is not intended for storage within residential districts. 
(b)  Allowances: A residence shall be allowed to park only one commercial vehicle within a residential district as defined under the conditions described by the following: 
(1)  Only one small commercial vehicle and/or only one small commercial trailer shall be allowed per residence. The vehicle shall be required to park in resident's driveway when parking in the front yard or on a well defined parking pad in the side or rear yard on private property and not on street right-of-way. The vehicles can not block any sidewalks/walk paths or block sight distance for adjacent driveways or streets. Any vehicle that is parked on street or on street right-of-way shall be in violation; or 
(2)  Only one large commercial vehicle shall be allowed per residence. The vehicle shall be required to park in resident's driveway when parking in the front yard or on a well defined parking pad in the side or rear yard on private property and not on street right-of-way. The vehicle can not block any sidewalks/walk paths or block sight distance for adjacent driveways or streets. All large commercial vehicles with open bodies designed for hauling materials/goods shall be empty when parked in residential districts. Any vehicle that is parked on street or on street right-of-way shall be in violation. 
(c)  Prohibitions: 
(1)  The operation of large commercial vehicles, large commercial trailers and commercial construction equipment shall be prohibited in residential districts except as allowed within this Code section. All large commercial vehicles, large commercial trailers, commercial construction equipment are prohibited from parking on the street, on street right-of-way or operating within a residential district except for the purpose of making local deliveries, pickups or providing a service. No large commercial trailers or commercial construction equipment will be allowed to park within residential districts. Maintenance of said vehicles shall be prohibited except for normal washing. 
(2)  Any said vehicle making local deliveries, pickups or providing a service shall place 36-inch orange cones or minimum 36-inch orange/black warning signs on portable stands or orange reflective hazard triangles around vehicle to delineate work zone and warn motorists of parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 87-126, § 2, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 99-52, § III, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 20-13.11. - Parking management districts. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes parking management districts for the purpose of managing parking spaces more efficiently and to provide for specific control and enforcement techniques. The goal is to increase availability of publicly controlled parking areas. 
(b)  Parking management districts. The following parking management districts are identified and boundaries described therefor: 
(1)  Uptown parking management district. Public parking from south right-of-way of Ninth Street to north right-of-way of Fourteenth Street and from west right-of-way of Bay Avenue to east right-of-way of Third Avenue as shown on the map below: 
PARKING MANAGEMENT [DISTRICTS] ENFORCEMENT AREA 

Parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful to park on the same day within the boundaries of the above described Uptown parking management district within the same block and same direction so as to extend the time parked in such block beyond the prescribed limit. 
(2)  Lakebottom Park/Weracoba Park: [Public parking along the following streets:] 13th Street, 18th Avenue, Gerrard Street, Cherokee Avenue and 17th Street, including all interior areas of the park, and 9th Avenue between 15th Street and Linwood Boulevard. 
(3)  City Services Center Garage Parking District: To regulate public and reserved parking in the City Services Center Garage and along Citizens Way and Midtown Drive from Rigdon Road to Boxwood Blvd. which provide ingress and egress to the garage. 
(Ord. No. 92-72, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 00-14, § I, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 03-22, § 1, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 06-74, § 1, 8-22-06; Ord. No. 08-43, § 1, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 13-36, § 1, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 19-019, § 1, 4-9-19) 
Sec. 20-13.12. - Uptown leased lot districts. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes leased parking areas under the control of the Consolidated Government more efficiently and to provide for specific control and enforcement techniques. The goal is to provide vehicles with a permit to park in a designated parking space. 
(b)  City leased parking lots; sticker or decal required. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or rank a vehicle in any parking lot or area designated and regulated by the Columbus Consolidated Government, by sign, as a permit parking only lot owned or leased by public or quasipublic bodies without displaying on such vehicle a sticker or decal or other insignia issued by or under the authority of the consolidated government for said public parking. Permit fees shall be regulated by parking lot lease agreements. A copy of which shall be maintained by the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 92-72, § 2, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 20-13.13. - Violations of sections 20-13.11 and 20-13.12. 
The penalties for violations of section 20-13.11 or 20-13.12 shall be the same as established by section 20-16.11. 
(Ord. No. 92-72, § 3, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 20-13.14. - Parking management and enforcement area. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5, the attached parking management and enforcement area is hereby established and special enforcement officers of the Department of Transportation/METRA are authorized to use certain motorized vehicles for the enforcement of parking and related traffic ordinances and regulations within the parking management and enforcement area and said parking management and enforcement area is incorporated herein by reference. Such motorized vehicles may include the use of golf carts or other vehicles as determined by the Department of Transportation/METRA for special enforcement officers in the performance of their enforcement duties. 

(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to deputize any necessary special enforcement officers of the Department of Transportation/METRA for the enforcement of parking and related traffic ordinances and regulations within said parking management enforcement area. The chief of police is further authorized to apply for any vehicle permit which may be necessary for the enforcement of such regulations. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized enforcement personnel or authorized delivery personnel to park a motorized ve-hicle anywhere other than authorized public parking spaces within and adjacent to said parking management and enforcement areas. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, §§ 1, 2, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 03-22, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-8, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 20-13.4 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 20-13.15. - Uptown residential parking areas. 
(a)  The following areas are hereby designated as residential parking areas in uptown Columbus: 

 
(b)  Permits for parking in the designated residential parking areas described in subsection (a) of this section may be obtained by residents living within the parking management and enforcement area established in section 20-13.14. These permits may be obtained from department of transportation/METRA upon payment of a fee of $25.00 per vehicle with a maximum of two vehicles per residence. These residential parking permits shall be valid for a period of 12 months and may be renewed within 30 days of expiration from the department of transportation/METRA, Upon application for a residential parking permit, the applicant must present proof of residency within the parking management and enforcement area described in section 20-13.14 and a valid driver's license and current Georgia vehicle registration, except military personnel and students may be exempt from the Georgia vehicle registration requirement upon showing valid military identification or a valid student identification card. 
(c)  Residential parking permits shall be displayed in the rear window of the vehicle when the vehicle is parked in the designated residential parking area which is assigned to each resident. 
(d)  Residents displaying a valid residential parking permit and parking in the designated residential parking area assigned to such resident may park in such assigned residential parking area without being subject to the four-hour parking limitation otherwise in effect. 
(e)  Residential parking permits may be revoked by the department of transportation/METRA upon (a) the providing of false information by any applicant for a permit; or (b) upon the receipt of three or more parking citations in Columbus, Georgia within a 12-month period for which fines remain unpaid or (c) the return of any check issued to the department of transportation/METRA for insufficient funds. 
(f)  Residential parking permits shall not be valid in other 15-minute, 30-minute or two-hour limit parking zones or four-hour zones designated in subsection (a). 
(g)  Other guidelines for the use of residential parking permits may be published by the department of transportation/METRA but shall not conflict with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-8, § 1, 2-6-01) 
ARTICLE XIV. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES 

Sec. 20-14.1. - Prohibited on private property without invitation. 
It shall be unlawful to park, rank, drive or leave an automobile or other vehicle upon private property in the city without invitation or permission from the person or corporation in possession, or entitled to possession, of the premises. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive the same upon or through private property in the city for the purpose of cutting through or taking a short-cut without the permission of the person in possession, or entitled to possession, of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.2. - Where prohibited area designated. 
It shall be unlawful to park or rank a vehicle at any point on the streets where limit lines, signs or targets are so placed as to make it clearly appear that parking or ranking at such point is prohibited. 
The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as established by section 20-16.11. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 00-35, § 2, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 20-14.3. - No parking during street paving; authority of traffic engineer. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate as a "no parking" area and to post "no parking" signs on any street in Columbus, Georgia, on the day when such street is scheduled to be paved or resurfaced and all ordinances allowing parking on such streets shall be of no force and effect while thus designated as a "no parking" area. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.4. - On sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to rank, park, drive or stop such vehicle upon any of the areas between the curb of any street and the sidewalk, or on the sidewalk, except on clearly defined driveways or entrances to private property having a terminus within the private property. No person shall park in such driveway or entrance in such a manner as to block the sidewalk. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall not apply to the west side of that portion of Tenth Avenue lying between the north line of Eleventh Street and the south line of Twelfth Street between the hours of 10:00 o'clock a.m. to 3:00 o'clock p.m. and 6:30 o'clock p.m. to 7:00 o'clock a.m. weekdays. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following described portion of Sixth Avenue, to-wit: Beginning at a point 380 feet southerly from the intersection of the east line of Sixth Avenue with the southerly line of Twelfth Street and from said beginning point running thence southerly along the east line of Sixth Avenue, a distance of 30 feet. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following described properties, to-wit: 
First Avenue and 6th Street. 
Corner 1st Street and 8th Avenue. 
First Avenue on the east side from the south line of 10th Street to the north line of 9th Street. 
715 1st Avenue. 
541 2nd Avenue. 
814 3rd Avenue. 
1430 3rd Avenue. 
1601-5 3rd Avenue. 
409 4th Avenue. 
1546 4th Avenue. 
901 5th Avenue. 
222 5th Avenue. 
6th Street and 2nd Avenue. 
100 6th Street. 
108 6th Street. 
208 8th Street. 
214 8th Street. 
8th Street and 5th Avenue. 
1219 10th Street. 
10th Street on the south side from the west line of 2nd Avenue to the east line of 1st Avenue. 
5th Avenue, east side, from the sidewalk on the north side of 14th Street to the north line of the paved Swift Mill parking lot. 
6th Avenue, east side, from a point 117 feet southerly from the intersection of the east line of 6th Avenue with the southerly line of 12th Street and running southerly a distance of 510 feet. 
2226 Fort Benning Road. 
901 Front Street. 
(e)  Historic District. The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the original designated Historic District boundary that exists north of 4th Street, west of Veterans Parkway, south of 9th Street and east of the Chattahoochee River. In lieu thereof, it shall be unlawful within the Historic District for any vehicle to park or stop such vehicle upon any areas between the street curb/edge of street paving and the street right-of-way/property line except in alignment with an existing driveway - curb cut. Any vehicles parked in this alignment shall park in a single line and perpendicular to the street. It shall be unlawful for any said vehicle to block any public sidewalk or for any portion of the vehicle to protrude into the street. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 74-88, § 1, 5-14-74; Ord. No. 74-191, § 1, 12-30-74; Ord. No. 77-32, § 2, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 86-13, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 86-35, § 1, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 87-164, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 10-57, § I, 11-23-10) 
Sec. 20-14.5. - In meter zone limits; time in nonparking spaces; position. 
In all parking meter zones in the city established by ordinances of the city, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to stop in the part of a street comprising such zone for a longer period of time than three minutes, except in regularly designated white limit line of parking meter spaces. In a part of a street comprising such parking meter zone, an operator shall remain at the wheel of any vehicle which stops at any place other than in regularly designated white limit lines of parking meter spaces. 
The driver of any vehicle permitted to stop in such parking meter zone pursuant to the provisions of this section, after stopping for such three minutes' period shall drive forward and not stop again, unless as required by traffic light or stop sign until he has passed the area within the next street intersection, after which stopping in a parking meter zone shall be again limited to a period of three minutes in accordance with the provisions herein. 
In all cases where a vehicle is stopped in a parking meter zone pursuant to the provisions of this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop on the right side of the street, parallel with the curb, and with the right side of his vehicle not closer than 24 inches from the nearest part of the vehicle next to which the vehicle of such driver has stopped. 
Excepted from the provisions of this section is the area on Broadway lying between 9th Street and 14th Street, and the three minute parking privilege shall not apply in said area. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.6. - Near fire plugs, in driveways; time in streets; loading areas. 
(a)  Fire hydrants. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park, rank or stop such vehicle within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
(b)  Loading zones. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park, rank or stop such vehicle within an official loading zone unless such person(s) is duly loading or unloading passengers or cargo and in no event shall any vehicle be parked, ranked or stopped in such loading zones for continuous period of time more than 15 minutes. 
(c)  Driveways. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park, rank or stop a vehicle in a public or private street so as to obstruct free passage to or from a public or private driveway; or to park, rank or stop such vehicle in a public driveway within street right-of-way so as to obstruct free passage. 
(d)  Time in streets. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park or rank a vehicle in a public street for a continuous period of more than 12 hours. 
(e)  Penalties. Persons convicted of violating paragraph (a) of this section shall be fined $100.00 for each offense. The penalties for persons convicted of violating paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall be the same as established by section 20-16.11. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 00-35, § 3, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 11-22, § I, 5-31-11; Ord. No. 17-57, § 1, 10-31-17) 
Sec. 20-14.7. - Vehicle dealers; restrictions; penalty. 
(a)  Vehicles which are kept, offered or exposed for sale, or kept for repair, by automobile dealers or other persons, may be parked or ranked in the part of the street or streets of the city abutting the fronts or sides of the places of business of such automobile dealers or persons only. The total length of the space shall be occupied by such vehicles to be co-extensive with and immediately opposite to the frontage or frontages of such places of business on such street or streets. 
(b)  Where a street is divided by a center park into two roadways for vehicular travel, vehicles kept, offered or exposed for sale, or kept for repair, by automobile dealers or other, may be parked or ranked on both sides of that roadway which is nearer to such dealer's or person's place of business. Where a street has only one roadway, such vehicles may be parked or ranked only on one side of such roadway, which shall be the side next to such dealer's or person's place of business. 
(c)  This section is not intended to apply to vehicles in transit, when parked or ranked in the streets of the city; the intention hereof is to prohibit an unreasonable use of the streets for business purposes, by automobile dealers and other persons, who, by parking and ranking vehicles which are kept, offered or exposed for sale, or kept for repair, in front of places other than their own, interfere with the proper access to such places of other persons; and this section is intended to be construed and enforced so as to prohibit such practice. 
(d)  This section is not intended to extend time limits for parking or ranking fixed by ordinances of the city. 
(e)  Any person who parks or ranks a vehicle contrary to the provisions hereof, and any person owning a vehicle who permits it to remain parked or ranked contrary to such provisions, shall, upon conviction before the recorder of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.8. - Painting or marking; authorization. 
No person, unless duly authorized by ordinance of the city, shall paint any curb on any street in the city with yellow or other colored paint or material; or erect or paint signs or lines in any street in the city indicating parking or ranking lines or places for vehicles; or erect or paint signs or lines of any kind indicating hours of times for parking or ranking vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.9. - Taxi stands, persons entitled to use. 
No person shall stop or rank, a vehicle in a taxicab stand space unless such person is duly authorized under the ordinances of the city to operate a taxicab, and is at the time operating a taxicab duly licensed under the tax and taxicab ordinances of the city; or unless such person is authorized by this Code to park in such space. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.10. - Towing—By police department. 
When any vehicle is parked, ranked, or stopped in violation of any provision of section 20-14.6 or section 20-14.14 of this article or any law relating to traffic, it shall be the duty of the police department of said city to tow or have towed such vehicle to the impounding lot of said city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 73-151, § 2, 11-13-73) 
Sec. 20-14.11. - Same—List of vehicles; report. 
The police department shall keep a list of all vehicles towed, accessible to public inspection and inquiry, and submit to the city manager monthly a statement of the number of vehicles towed and the name or names of the persons performing the services. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.12. - Same—Release; evidence of ownership; storage fees. 
When vehicles are towed to police headquarters or to the public works department pursuant to section 20-14.10 of this chapter, the vehicle shall not be released until the person calling for the vehicle has afforded the police department satisfactory evidence of his ownership and paid the storage fees for removal and storage, such fees not to exceed $5.00 for cost of removal and $0.75 per day after the expiration of 24 hours for storage, which shall be assessed against the vehicle or the owner or other person having the right to possession of the impounded vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.13. - Loads; extending, restrictions. 
A vehicle shall neither rank, park nor stop with any part of it or its load extending beyond limit lines on a street; nor within ten feet of a fire hydrant; nor within 15 feet of an intersecting street line. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 15, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-14.14. - Parking in areas designated for on duty government employees prohibited; parking in vicinity of government center. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park or stop such vehicle within off-street parking areas designated and signed as "For On Duty Employee Parking Only," unless such operator is an employee at the government center and such employee shall park only in the space designated and assigned to such employee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park or rank a vehicle in the south driveway of the government center from Second Avenue to First Avenue other than for loading and unloading, except for the following: 
(1)  Representatives of the news media when such representatives are on news assignments at the government center. 
(2)  Service vehicles while servicing the government center. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful at all times for any operator of a vehicle to park, rank, or stop such vehicle in the exit and entrance ramps to the government center underground parking area. 
(d)  Any person violating any provisions of this section, upon conviction before the recorder, shall be fined in the amount of $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 73-151, § 1, 11-13-73) 
Sec. 20-14.15. - Handicapped parking areas. 
It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 20-19.1 of this Code for any person to park or rank a vehicle in any parking space or area designated by sign as a parking space for handicapped parking, whether on the public streets and ways of Columbus, Georgia, or upon streets, ways and parking areas which are owned by public or quasipublic bodies regulated by Columbus, Georgia, or on privately owned streets, ways and parking areas, without displaying on said vehicle one of the following: 
(1)  A license tag issued by the State of Georgia or other state indicating thereon that it is issued to a handicapped veteran or a disabled person; or 
(2)  A sticker or decal or other insignia issued by or under the authority of the mayor's committee for employment of the handicapped indicating that the vehicle is used for the transportation of a handicapped person. 
(3)  Persons desiring to obtain the certificate of the mayor's committee for employment of the handicapped for use pursuant to this section shall make application to the mayor's committee for employment of the handicapped giving the type of vehicle, the make, model number, year model, manufacturer's number, and Georgia or other state license tag registration number, the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and the name and address of the handicapped person for whose use the vehicle is intended, if different from the owner. Said application shall be accompanied by the certificate of a doctor so certifying the applicant is handicapped. 
The mayor's committee for employment of the handicapped shall issue under its authority such certificate in the form of a sticker or decal or other insignia as it shall determine, that is to be affixed to the vehicle. Such certificate shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 20-19.1 of this Code for any person to park any vehicle in any of the parking places referred to above when said vehicle is not actually being used to transport a handicapped person, notwithstanding that such vehicle may have the required sticker, decal or other evidence attached to it. 
(5)  Any person violating this [section] shall pay a fine of $200.00. If an offender proceeds to recorder's court and if convicted by the recorder, offenders shall be subject to imprisonment and court costs and fines not to exceed the statutory maximum set forth at O.C.G.A. § 40-6-226, which is currently established at $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 80-26, § 1, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 10-25, § 2, 6-15-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-26, adopted April 1, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification herein of the provisions of § 1 of said ordinance as § 20-14.15 is at the discretion of the editor. Notwithstanding the provisions in the introductory paragraph and (4) of § 20-14.15 which refer to the penalty provisions of § 20-19.1, § 2 of Ord. No. 80-26 provided as follows: "Section 2. That any person violating this ordinance shall, upon conviction before the recorder of Columbus, Georgia, be fined in an amount not exceeding $250.00 dollars or imprisoned not exceeding 90 days, either or both, in the discretion of the recorder." 
Sec. 20-14.16. - Areas designated for handicap parking. 
Broadway: 
(1)  Beginning 205 feet south of the south curb of Fourteenth Street and running south along the west curb a distance of 40 feet. 
(2)  Beginning at a point 22 feet north of the north curb of Twelfth Street and running north along the west curb a distance of 19 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
(3)  Beginning at a point 167 feet north of the north curb of Twelfth Street and running north along the west curb a distance of 14 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
(4)  Beginning at a point 325 feet north of the north curb of Twelfth Street and running north along the west curb a distance of 15 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
(5)  Beginning at a point 22 feet south of the south curb of 11th Street and running south along the east curb a distance of 13 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
(6)  Beginning at a point 24 feet north of the north curb and running north along the east curb a distance of 116 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
(7)  Beginning at a point 462 feet north of the north curb and running north along the east curb a distance of 88 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
Citizens Way , with a four (4) hour time limit shall be established along the west side of Citizens Way beginning 474 feet from the south curb of Macon Road and running southerly for a distance of 107 feet. 
Front Avenue, on the west curb, beginning at a point 65 feet south of the south curb of Ninth Street and running south along the west curb of Front Avenue a distance of 145 feet. 
Lawyers Lane, beginning at a point 50 feet north of the north curb of Francis Street and running 55 feet north along the west curb of Lawyers Lane. 
Rhodes Street, beginning at a point 61 feet east of the east curb of 13th Avenue and running east along the south curb a distance of 53 feet. 
Warren Williams Road, beginning at a point 260 feet east of the centerline of Webster Avenue and running east along the south curb a distance of 24 feet. 
Eighth Avenue, beginning at a point 165 feet north of the north curb of Center Street and running 70 feet north along the east curb of Eighth Avenue. 
Eighth Avenue, handicap parking with a four-hour time limit beginning at a point 375 feet south of the south curb of 9th Street and running south along the west curb a distance of 40 feet. 
Fifteenth Avenue, beginning at a point 292 feet south of the south curb of Thirty-second Street and running south along the east curb of Fifteenth Avenue a distance of 23 feet. 
Fifth Avenue: 
(1)  Beginning at a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Ninth Street and running thence north along the west curb of Fifth Avenue a distance of 70 feet. 
(2)  Beginning at a point 20 feet south of the south curb of Twelfth Street and run south along the west curb a distance of 25 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
First Avenue: 
(1)  Beginning at a point 154 feet south of the south curb of Tenth Street and running south along the west curb of First Avenue a distance of 17 feet. Two-hour time limit. 
(2)  Beginning at a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Tenth Street and run north along the east curb a distance of 22 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
Ninth Street, beginning at a point 133 feet west of the west curb of Fifth Avenue and running west along the north curb of Ninth Street a distance of 25 feet. Two-hour time limit. 
Sixth Street, beginning at a point 125 feet east of the east curb of Second Avenue and running east along the south curb a distance of 50 feet. 
Tenth Street: 
(1)  Beginning at a point 64 feet east of the east curb of Bay Avenue and running east along the north curb a distance of 15 feet. 
(2)  Beginning at a point 106 feet east of the east curb of First Avenue and run east a distance of 44 feet. Four-hour time limit. 
Third Avenue, beginning at a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Thirty-fifth Street and running 25 feet north along the east curb of Third Avenue. 
Thirty-fifth Street, beginning at a point 30 feet east of the east curb of Third Avenue and running 25 feet east along the north curb of Thirty-fifth Street. 
Twelfth Street, beginning at a point 187 feet west of the west curb of Broadway and running west along the south curb of Twelfth Street a distance of 45 feet. 
Twelfth Street, beginning at a point 137 feet east of the east curb of Second Avenue and running east along the north curb a distance of 65 feet having a four-hour time limit. 
Twenty-seventh Street: 
(1)  Beginning at a point eight feet east of the east curb of Tenth Avenue and running east a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(2)  Beginning at a point 113 feet west of the west curb of Beacon Avenue and running west a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(3)  Beginning at a point 18 feet east of the east curb of Beacon Avenue and running east a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(4)  Beginning at a point 39 feet east of the west curb of Eleventh Avenue and running east a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(5)  Beginning at a point seven feet east of the west curb of Peabody Avenue and running east a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(6)  Beginning at a point 147 feet west of the west curb of Waverly Avenue and running west a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(7)  Beginning at a point 27 feet east of the west curb of Waverly Avenue and running east a distance of 25 feet along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street. 
(8)  Beginning five feet west of the west curb of Waverly Avenue and running west along the south curb of Twenty-seventh Street a distance of 24 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80-137, § 1, 12-9-80; Ord. No. 81-48, § 1, 6-9-81; Ord. No. 84-12, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 85-122, § 1, 10-22-85; Ord. No. 86-19, § 1, 2-25-86; Ord. No. 88-127, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 88-128, § 2, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-79, § 1, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 99-78, §§ IV, V, 10-28-99; Ord. No. 99-85, § I, 11-30-99; Ord. No. 00-104, § I, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 01-74, § II, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 02-115, § I, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 03-27, § IV, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 13-48, § I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-14.17. - City manager authorized to increase parking time limits. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to increase parking time limits to a maximum of eight hours for parking spaces in a temporary construction zone for temporary construction projects or for special events and such increased parking time limits are hereby authorized for a period of time not to exceed 12 months. If the construction project or special event is to last more than 12 months, then the city manager and traffic engineer shall initiate an ordinance to regulate such parking spaces during such construction project or special event. The city manager and traffic engineer are hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs delineating such temporary construction or special event zones and parking limits therein. 
(Ord. No. 01-83, § 1, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 20-14.18. - Reserved parking for public safety. 
A "Reserved Parking for Public Safety" zone shall be established along the west side of Citizens Way beginning 410 feet from the south curb of Macon Road and running southerly for a distance of 55 feet. 
(Ord. No. 13-48, § I, 10-8-13) 
ARTICLE XV. - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 

Sec. 20-15.1. - Loading or unloading; trailers; hours on certain streets. 
From the hour of nine-thirty o'clock a.m. (9:30 a.m.) to the hour of nine-thirty o'clock p.m. (9:30 p.m.), it shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle having a trailer or other vehicle attached thereto, to load or unload goods, wares or merchandise, or other articles or materials, or to stop such motor vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise, or other articles or materials, on the following parts of streets in the city, to-wit: 
(1)  Broadway, from the north line of Ninth Street to the south line of Fourteenth Street; 
(2)  First Avenue, from the north line of Ninth Street to the north line of Fourteenth Street; 
(3)  Tenth Street, from the west line of Second Avenue to the west line of Broadway; 
(4)  Eleventh Street, from the west line of Second Avenue to the west line of Broadway; 
(5)  Twelfth Street, from the west line of Second Avenue to the west line of Broadway; 
(6)  Thirteenth Street, from the west line of Second Avenue to the west line of Broadway. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 16, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-15.2. - Backing against curb; time; direction. 
If it should become necessary to back any vehicle against the curb to load or unload freight or materials, it shall be lawful, unless prohibited or restricted by other provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city, for the vehicle to be so backed and placed for such space of time only as may be necessary to load or unload. Such vehicle shall be headed as nearly as possible in the direction of the traffic. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 16, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-15.3. - Maximum time allowed in zone. 
Vehicles are authorized to stop in and occupy loading zones only while actually engaged in loading or unloading materials, articles, equipment, furniture, or supplies, but no vehicle shall remain continuously in such zone for a period of more than 30 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 16, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-15.4. - Timed zones for loading and unloading. 
A "15 Minute Parking" zone for loading and unloading shall be established along the west side of Citizens Way beginning 581 feet from the south curb line of Macon Road and running southerly for a distance of 73 feet. 
(Ord. No. 13-48, § I, 10-8-13) 
ARTICLE XVI. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 20-16.1. - Zones; time allotted; method of parking; charges.[2] 
The parts of streets in the city which shall constitute parking meter zones where parking meters shall be maintained, used and installed, the charges for parking or ranking, the periods of time for which vehicles may be parked or ranked for the specific charge, the over-all time limit for parking or ranking continuously in the same space, and whether spaces allotted to parking meters are assigned for parking or for ranking, except where said curb is marked for fire exits, loading zones, no parking, taxi stands and bus stops. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-146, § 1, enacted Dec. 23, 1975, and Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, enacted Jan. 28, 1976, repealed all of the parking meter zones formerly enumerated in § 20-16.1. In addition to Ord. No. 75-146 and Ord. No. 76-8, § 20-16.1 was derived from the following ordinances: 

 
The following ordinances established a moratorium for specified periods of time on certain of the parking meter zones formerly enumerated in § 20-16.1: 
Section 3 of Ord. No. 76-8 provided that the time limits for parking in the areas on Second Avenue, Third Avenue and Twelfth Street would be for 30 minutes. Section 4 of said ordinance provided that the method of parking, whether by ranking or parking, would remain as the method authorized after the adoption of said Ord. No. 76-8. 

Sec. 20-16.2. - Spaces; marking; sizes; vehicle position. 
On parts of streets designated in the preceding section hereof there shall be marked limit lines within which vehicles are to be either parked or ranked, in accordance with the provisions of said preceding section. 
Where "parking" is herein provided for, such limit lines shall be marked at angles of approximately 30 degrees and marked with white lines so as to provide spaces approximately 7½ feet in width. Vehicles using such parking spaces when parked at sidewalk curbs shall be parked within such diagonal limit lines with their right front wheel against the adjacent curb, and when parked at a center parkway shall have the left front wheel against the parkway curb. 
Where "ranking" is herein provided for, such limit lines shall be marked parallel with and approximately eight feet from the adjacent curb, and each space for ranking shall be divided from its contiguous space by a white line, so as to give to each ranking space a length of approximately 20 feet. Vehicles using such ranking spaces shall be ranked within such rectangular spaces with their right wheels next to the adjacent curb. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.3. - Installation; type. 
Where parking meters are already in place, they shall be maintained as now located. When required by ordinance, the city manager shall have installed parking meters of the make and general type approved by the traffic division of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.4. - Hours of operation; depositing coin. 
From the hour of nine o'clock a.m., to the hour of six o'clock p.m. (except on Saturdays and Sundays and except as otherwise provided), in order that the police officers of the city may properly compute the time during which a vehicle is parked, it shall be unlawful for the operator to drive a vehicle into or occupy one of the parking meter spaces provided for herein without depositing in the meter at that place lawful coins of the United States in such amounts as are provided for in section 20-16.1 hereof for the period of time in which such vehicle is so parked. When depositing coins in the meter, the handle shall be turned to the right and then returned to the left, in accordance with directions to that effect appearing on the meter. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 76-8, § 2, 1-28-76) 
Sec. 20-16.5. - Continuous parking; limit; definition. 
In order to hasten the departure of vehicle so as to help eliminate the abuse of the privilege of parking on the parts of the public streets herein designated, it shall be unlawful to permit a vehicle to remain in a parking space for a longer period continuously than the time limit applicable to such parking spaces as set forth in section 20-14.8 hereof. The word "continuously" as used herein shall be construed not only to mean leaving a vehicle stationed in a parking space, but it is the intention hereof that an operator of a vehicle shall be guilty of "continuously" occupying a parking space when he drives such vehicle from such space and then immediately reoccupies the same space. 
The operator of any vehicle occupying a parking space longer than the time allowed in such space as set forth in section 20-16.1. of this Code, shall be guilty of a separate violation for each successive period of time as set forth for said space, that such vehicle occupies said space continuously. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.6. - Loading or unloading; time of free parking. 
Between the hours from nine o'clock a.m. to six o'clock p.m., the operator of a vehicle while engaged in loading or unloading freight, express, parcel post mail, merchandise or other materials may occupy with such vehicle any parking space continuously for the period of 30 minutes, without the necessity of depositing any coin in such meter. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.7. - Slugs. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter a slug device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.8. - Tampering. 
It shall be unlawful to deface or tamper with, damage, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair any parking meter installed under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.9. - Violations; indicator; presumptions. 
When a parking meter displays the word "Violation", it shall be prima facie evidence, and presumed that the operator of the vehicle parked at such meter has violated the provisions of this article relating to the deposit of coins and the time limits for parking. When a vehicle is parked or ranked contrary to the provisions of this article, and the operator is unknown to the police officer discovering such violation, it shall be prima facie evidence, and presumed, that such operator is the same person as the owner of the automobile in whose name the vehicle is registered in the State of such owner's residence. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.10. - Notice; appearance. 
When a vehicle is parked or ranked in violation of this article or in case of the violation of any other provisions hereof, and the operator of such vehicle is not present at the time such violation is discovered by a police officer of the city, such police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice directing such operator to appear at the recorder's court at a named time; and failure of such operator to appear at such time shall constitute a violation of this article. 
The notice attached to the vehicle shall have the date and hour of day when such notice was attached. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.11. - Fines; imprisonment. 
It shall be unlawful to park vehicles in parking spaces for a period longer than the time marked for such spaces, and violators shall incur a fine of $40.00 effective July 1, 2016, when paid within ten days of citation; for violators where fines are not paid within ten days, the fine shall double for each offense. If an offender proceeds to recorders court and if convicted by the recorder, offenders shall be subject to fines or imprisonment or both in the discretion of the recorder. Said fines shall apply to all parking violations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 91-60, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 00-12, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 10-25, § 1, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 15-5, § 1, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 16-23, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 20-16.12. - "Fixing" prohibited. 
No police officer or any other official of the city shall take up or revoke any summons or notification card provided for under this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-16.13. - Moneys; uses. 
The coins deposited in parking meters as provided herein shall be used to provide for the rental, purchase, installation, inspection, repair, maintenance and control of such meters, as well as the cost of maintaining sufficient police necessary to enforce the provisions of this article and other ordinances in aid hereof. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 17, 7-20-71) 
ARTICLE XVII. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 20-17.1. - Speed at street intersections; exceptions; stop required before railroad intersection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or employee thereof to operate any locomotive engine or cars, or both, so as to enter the intersection of the railroad track with any street or avenue in this city at a rate of speed greater than 15 miles per hour, but once the lead engine or car has entered and crossed the street or avenue, it shall not be unlawful for the speed of such train to exceed 15 miles per hour, with a maximum speed of 20 miles per hour; provided, however, that between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., it shall be lawful for any railroad company, or employee thereof to operate a locomotive engine or cars, or both, at any speed up to a maximum of 20 miles per hour at any point on Ninth Street in said city. 
(b)  The above provisions do not apply to the following portions of railroad tracks, and the speed limits on these tracks will be as follows: 

 
(c)  Where a locomotive engine or engine with car crosses over intersecting line or lines of a railroad, either commercial or street railroads, such engine or engines and cars shall come to a stop not less than 50 feet from such crossings unless otherwise provided in this Code; provided, however, if such intersecting line or lines of railroad are provided with "derailers" or other safety devices so as to prevent a locomotive or car on such intersecting line from colliding with the locomotive engine or cars first mentioned, then it shall not be necessary to stop. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 18, 7-20-71; Ord. No. 77-16, § 1, 2-8-77; Ord. No. 85-57, §§ 1—3, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 20-17.2. - Crossings: regulating; maintenance. 
All railroad companies owning or operating railroads within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to construct and keep in good repair and safe condition at the various street crossings and at such other points throughout the city as may be designated by the city manager, on suitable crossings over the tracks of such railroads. The crossings shall be constructed upon plans and specifications approved by the city manager and the superintendent of public works; and when so required shall be built in accordance with plans furnished by the superintendent of public works. On Broad Street, between First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Avenues, between Fourth and Nineteenth Streets, wherever it may be required and so designated by the city manager, there shall be built two crossings, each to be at least 20 feet wide; one on each side of the avenue or street. All other crossings shall be at least 40 feet wide. Whenever it may be required and when so notified by the superintendent of public works, the railroad company shall construct and maintain across and through its tracks sidewalk and crosswalk crossings, of width not less than eight feet. The crossing shall be built in a good and substantial manner and of such material as to maintain the surface of the driveway or walk even with the top of the rails; and the space between the rails must be kept smooth and even with the top of the rails. Wherever crossings are located where the grade of the street and the tracks vary or differ, suitable approaches to the crossing shall be built and maintained by the railroad company. 
Wherever the distance from center to center of two or more tracks located on one street is not greater than 12 feet, the space between such tracks shall be kept in good order and repair by the railroad company owning or operating such tracks. And at wagon or foot crossings over such tracks the space between the tracks shall be subject to the same regulation as that between the rails. 
The grade of the railroad tracks and that of the streets along which they are laid must conform as far as practicable, and the railroad companies are hereby required to keep the surface of the street between the rails and 18 inches outside of each rail, smooth and even and not more than two inches below the top of the rails. Suitable openings or drains shall be built and maintained by the railroad companies under and through the several railroad tracks owned or operated by them, in order to effect the proper drainage of any street or area; such openings or drains to be located at such points as may be designated by the superintendent of public works; provided, certain tracks and locations when so designated by the superintendent of public works shall not be subject to the requirements of this section. When any crossing or section of tracks is in bad condition and does not conform to the requirements of this section, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to notify the owner or superintendent or agent or operator of the railroad to have same put in order as prescribed in this section; and should the work not be done, or not approved by the superintendent of public works, upon conviction of such owner, or superintendent or agent or operator of any railroad having failed or refused to have such work done in conformity with the terms of this section in the recorder's court, the owner or superintendent or agent or operator shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 18, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-17.3. - Flagman required of railway companies. 
It shall be the duty of the railway companies to have and maintain at all times at the crossing over its tracks located on Tenth Avenue, between Tenth Street and Ninth Street, a flagman whose duty it shall be to signal with a flag on a staff in hand by day and with a lighted lantern in hand by night, of approaching engine and engines and cars to vehicles; or, in lieu of such flagman, the engines and trains operated by the railway companies on such line of track may come to a full stop within 20 feet of the crossing of Tenth Avenue and Andrews Road over the tracks and be preceded by a flagman with a flag on a staff in hand by day and a lighted lantern in hand by night; and when such engine or engine and cars on the track is about to cross such street, such flagman shall proceed to the middle of the street, where he shall stop and give notice of the approach of such engine or engines and cars by waving the flag by day and the lighted lantern by night, and such engine or engines and cars shall not enter upon such crossing until the flagman shall have reached the middle of the street and give such notice. In lieu of providing a flagman at the aforementioned crossing, or of causing said engines and trains to come to a full stop and be preceded over said crossings by a flagman, as hereinbefore provided, the railway companies may, at their option, install and maintain automatic signalling devices at said crossing, satisfactory to the Council of Columbus, Georgia. The cost of the installation of said automatic signalling devices at said crossings shall be borne by the railway companies and Columbus, Georgia on a 1/3-1/3-1/3 basis. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 18, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-17.4. - Time limit on blocking street. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same while engaged in local switching or any other intra city transit in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same so that it shall stop in an intersection with a public street and block such public street longer than ten minutes including the time such train is in motion and the time such train is stopped. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished according to section 7 of the Charter of Columbus, Georgia, as codified, by a fine not exceeding $250.00 or imprisoned not to exceed 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 18, 7-20-71) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - MUSCOGEE COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-18.1. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable, within the city to all grounds owned or held by Muscogee County School District. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.2. - Definition. 
The word "vehicle" as used herein shall include both vehicles propelled by both motor power and by muscular power. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.3. - Article cumulative. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city not inconsistent with the provisions hereof shall be applicable to such grounds of such school district. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.4. - Speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on such roadways at a speed greater than is reasonable and safe, which speed shall in no case exceed 15 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.5. - Roadways-using; required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, park, rank or stop a vehicle on such grounds except on the roadways or in spaces set aside for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.6. - When permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, park, rank or stop a vehicle on such grounds or the roadways therein unless such person is transporting pupils or is on other business connected with school officials, teachers or employees of such schools or where the school authorities permit the use of such grounds or the buildings thereon to be used for other than school purposes, such as lectures, concerts or other cultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.7. - Noises; prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb in any manner, any of the schools of such school district by the making of noise or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.8. - Signs-obeying. 
Where on any of such grounds there is erected a sign reading "Exit", it shall be unlawful for a person to drive a vehicle into such grounds at such point; and, where there is erected on any of such grounds a sign reading "Entrance", it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle from such grounds at such point; provided, however, in emergencies police officers may direct traffic contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.9. - Erecting signs. 
The authorities of such school district shall erect on such grounds signs setting forth the place and manner of parking or ranking and the speed limit on such grounds, the places for entrance and exit, and any other signs appropriate to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.10. - Damaging signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, damage or interfere with any sign placed on such grounds pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-198, § 19, 7-20-71) 
Sec. 20-18.11. - Maximum loads for school buses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a school bus with a load limit for such school bus in excess of 20 percent above the manufacturer's rated seating capacity of said bus. 
(Ord. No. 71-263, §§ 1, 2, 10-12-71; Ord. No. 71-265, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-71) 
ARTICLE XIX. - PENALTIES FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 20-19.1. - Penalties established. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapter 20, Traffic, of this Code of Ordinances shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 73-110, § 1, 7-31-73; Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83) 
ARTICLE XX. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION 

Sec. 20-20.1. - Notice of intention to immobilize vehicles. 
Whenever it is determined that a vehicle should be subject to immobilization, removal or impoundment because there are three or more outstanding, unpaid, overdue parking tickets, the latest of which has been unpaid for a period of at least 30 days, the following procedures shall be employed: 
(a)  A determination shall be made of the license plate or manufacturer's ID number or such other information as may be obtained from a reasonable examination of the vehicle. The name and addresses of the responsible party shall be then determined from information made available by the motor vehicle registration or other appropriate licensing authority of the state in which the vehicle is licensed or such other source(s) as may be reasonably available. A prima facie presumption of the identity of the responsible party shall be established from such a determination. If it is determined that the vehicle is subject to any registered lien, any notice required pursuant to this article shall be transmitted to the lien holder, but the lien holder shall not be construed to be a responsible party. Any evidence that the ownership of the vehicle has changed as reflected on its registration records shall not relieve the responsible party from responsibility under this article for any violation occurring prior to such change in ownership. 
(b)  A written notice shall be transmitted to the responsible party of the vehicle at the address of the responsible party as determined in accordance with the procedures in subsection (a). Notice shall be effected by certified mail, return receipt to addressee only, or by personal delivery with a certificate of the date, name, and address to whom delivery was effected or attempted. Notice to the owner shall constitute notice to the responsible party if other than the owner, it being the duty of the owner to so advise the responsible party. A return receipt specifying delivery was refused shall be deemed to have satisfied the provisions of this section. The written notice dated when transmitted shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The license number of the vehicle or the manufacturer's ID number or if said numbers are missing, such other information to reasonably describe the vehicle. 
(2)  The name of the registered owner of the vehicle and the responsible party if different or the registered owner is unknown. 
(3)  The date and nature of each violation which establishes the grounds for the proceeding instituted pursuant to this article. A legible copy of each citation, subpoena or other document providing this information attached to the notice shall satisfy this requirement provided that the notice states the number of violations or other identifying information to permit reference to the attachments. 
(4)  A statement that violation(s) exist(s), the proceedings or action that may be taken against the vehicle or the responsible party, a short summary of the title of this ordinance or the Columbus Code section in which the ordinance is codified and the penalties and procedures to which the vehicle or responsible party may be subject. 
(5)  A statement giving notice that the party may avoid further penalties and procedures if all outstanding unpaid penalties, fines and costs for violations of the Columbus Code or state statute are paid in full within seven calendar days of the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notification made pursuant to this article are satisfied. Proposed further procedures may be suspended if a request for a hearing is filed with the Columbus Recorder's Court pursuant to section 20-20.4 within such time period. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.2. - Immobilization of vehicles. 
(a)  A parking enforcement officer of METRA may immobilize by the use of vehicle immobilization equipment any vehicle at the request of the Columbus Police Department or any vehicle that is parked in a parking enforcement district as set forth in Columbus Code section 20-13 if: 
(1)  A notice has been sent pursuant to section 20-20.1; 
(2)  Seven calendar days have elapsed from the date the notice was sent; 
(3)  The fines listed therein have not been paid; and 
(4)  No request for hearing has been filed with recorder's court. 
(b)  When attaching vehicle immobilization equipment to a vehicle, the officer shall affix notice to the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be readily visible. The notice shall: 
(1)  Warn that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle; 
(2)  State the total amount of civil penalties due for parking tickets that are overdue and unpaid that are attributable to such vehicle, in addition to an immobilization fee for the removal of the vehicle immobilization equipment; and 
(3)  List the address and telephone number to be contacted to pay the charges to have the vehicle immobilization equipment removed. 
(c)  If the civil penalties and the immobilization fee are not paid or satisfactory arrangements in lieu of payment are not made within 24 hours from the time of the attachment of the vehicle immobilization equipment, the vehicle may be towed and impounded. 
(d)  Upon payment of all civil penalties, overdue and unpaid parking tickets, and the immobilization fee, the vehicle immobilization equipment shall be removed and the vehicle released to the registered owner or any other person legally entitled to claim possession of the vehicle. The fee may be paid in the form of a refundable bond pending the outcome of a hearing requested pursuant to section 20-20.5. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, damage, remove, destroy or take the vehicle immobilization equipment placed on a vehicle pursuant to this section without all civil penalties and application charges having first been paid, or a bond posted. Columbus shall not be responsible for any damage to an immobilized vehicle resulting from unauthorized attempts to free or remove the vehicle. 
(f)  An immobilization fee of $50.00 shall be charged for the removal of the vehicle immobilization equipment. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.3. - Responsible party. 
Responsible party shall mean one or more of the following: 
(a)  The owner of a vehicle as determined in accordance with the records of the title certifying authority of the state in which the vehicle is titled at the time of any violation at issue or such other record of ownership as may be established by credible evidence; or 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle at the time of any violation at issue; or 
(c)  The lessee of a vehicle when the parking enforcement official possesses actual notice of a written lease agreement which identifies the owner and lessee, with the address of the lessee and credible evidence that the lessee maintained possession, control or responsibility for the vehicle during the time any violation at issue occurred; or 
(d)  If the titled owner is a corporation, the responsible party shall be an officer, director or employee who operates the vehicle in the course of the corporation's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available by the corporation for use or the registered agent of the corporation as determined by the records of the corporation commissioner of the State of Georgia, provided that the registered agent shall not be personally subject to any violation or penalty pursuant to this article but may subject the corporation to its provisions; or 
(e)  For a partnership, the responsible party shall be the general partner or any employee who operates the vehicle in the course of the partnership's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available; or 
(f)  If a vehicle is titled in the name of another entity or organization, the responsible party shall be the natural person(s) who by the principles of Georgia law would possess ownership or control of the entity or who operates the vehicle in the course of the entity's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available; or 
(g)  If it is determined that the vehicle is subject to any registered lien, any notice required pursuant to this article shall be transmitted to the lien holder, but the lien holder shall not be construed to be a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.4. - Hearing on immobilization. 
The owner(s), responsible party or other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in an immobilized vehicle are entitled to request a hearing in Columbus Recorder's Court to contest the validity of the immobilization of the vehicle. The hearing shall follow the rules established in section 20-20.5. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.5. - Request for hearing on immobilization or impoundment. 
(a)  After a responsible party or owner has received a notice under section 20-20.1 or after a vehicle has been immobilized or impounded pursuant to this article, the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle are entitled to request a hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle. The request for a hearing must be in writing, signed, dated and will state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the notice, immobilization or impoundment invalid or unjustified, and such other information as the director of METRA may require. 
(b)  The recorder shall set and conduct a hearing on the matter within 21 days of receipt of a proper request filed pursuant to this section, except where a vehicle has not yet been released from impoundment, in which case the recorder will set and conduct the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or federally sanctioned holidays. 
(c)  The owner(s) and any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle are only entitled to one hearing for each notice or tow of that vehicle. Any person who fails to appear at the hearing without good cause will not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.6. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for person(s) to demonstrate by statements of witnesses and other evidence that the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle is invalid or unjustified. The recorder shall determine whether the immobilization or impoundment is proper and whether the removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees were or would be properly assessed. The recorder shall not have the authority to determine the validity of a parking citation unless the time for filing a request for a hearing on the parking citation has not passed, in which case the recorder has discretion to consolidate the immobilization/impoundment hearing and the parking citation hearing. 
(b)  If the recorder finds that the notice, immobilization, or impoundment of the vehicle was invalid or unjustified, the recorder shall direct the immediate vacation of the notice or release of the vehicle, and the owner(s) or any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle shall not be liable for any tow or storage charges. If the costs of immobilization or impoundment and the administrative fee have already been paid, the recorder shall direct that all such monies be refunded to whomever paid such monies. 
(c)  If the recorder finds that the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle was valid and justified, the recorder will direct that the vehicle continue to be held until all tickets, fines, immobilization fees, tow and storage charges are paid. 
(d)  The decision of the recorder shall be the final decision by the Columbus Consolidated Government. Any person aggrieved by the decision may file a petition for judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days from the final decision. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) above, Columbus shall have no liability or responsibility for damage that may be caused by removal of a vehicle or for any towing or storage fees or charges. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.7. - Sale of unclaimed vehicle. 
(a)  If a vehicle is towed and impounded, then the director of METRA shall send notice of the impoundment and intent to sell by registered mail to the legal owner, when such owner is ascertainable, and to the registered lien holder. Prior to such sale, the director of METRA shall publish at least once in a newspaper of general circulation a notice of the sale, describing the vehicle to be sold and stating where and when the sale will take place. 
(b)  The Traffic Incident Management Service Provider (hereinafter referred to as "TIMS"), at which impounded vehicles are stored shall provide to the finance director, on a regular basis, a list of all unclaimed vehicles that have been towed under this article and that have been in storage 30 days or longer and are subject to be sold. This list shall include the year, make, model, serial number and tag number for each such vehicle. The finance director, or designee, will, as soon as convenient, authorize the sale of such vehicles in accordance with the provisions of such contracts as authorized by city council. 
(c)  Within seven days after disposal, the TIMS provider shall furnish the finance director with a print out of the results of the disposition, including the date, vehicle description, purchaser, amount sold, and authorized charges for each vehicle. The proceeds from a sale under this section shall be used to satisfy the charges for tickets, penalties, booting fees, removal and storage of the vehicle, and for the reasonable charges or expenses for the notice, advertisement, and sale of the vehicle. The balance, if any, shall be paid into the treasury of Columbus and distributed upon request to the owner of the vehicle. 
(d)  There shall be no right of redemption from any sale or other disposition made pursuant to the terms of this section. Neither Columbus, its officials, agents, or employees shall be liable for failure to deliver such a vehicle to anyone claiming a right of redemption to a vehicle sold in a manner consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Sec. 20-20.8. - Amnesty periods. 
The city manager may designate and announce amnesty periods during which violators' vehicles will not be subject to immobilization. 
(Ord. No. 04-9, § 1, 2-10-04; 04-16, § 1, 2-24-04) 
ARTICLE XXI. - COLUMBUS CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT PLAN FOR PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 20-21.1. - Personal transportation vehicles. 
Based on the Columbus Police Chief and the Columbus Traffic Engineer's determination that certain public street segments in Columbus, Georgia are suitable to safely accommodate both regular vehicular traffic and personal transportation vehicles as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(43.1)("PTVs"), the use of PTVs will be permitted on the public street segments identified in paragraph (1) if the conditions set forth in paragraphs (2) through (10) below are complied with. 
(1)  Personal transportation vehicles (PTVs) may be driven only on the following public street segments: 
• Bay Avenue between 10th Street and 12th Street. 
• Front Avenue between 5th Street and 14th Street. 
• Broadway between 4th Street and 14th Street. 
• 1st Avenue from 4th Street to 13th Street. 
• 3rd Avenue from 4th Street to 13th Street. 
• 5th Street between Front Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 6th Street between Front Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 7th Street between Front Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 8th Street between Front Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 9th Street between Front Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 10th Street between Bay Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 11th Street between Bay Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 12th Street between Bay Avenue and the west curb of Veterans Parkway. 
• 14th Street between Broadway and the cul-de-sac at the Frank Martin Pedestrian Bridge. 
(2)  PTVs shall not be driven on 13th Street; however, they may cross 13th Street at its intersection with Broadway in accordance with all traffic regulations. PTVs shall not be driven on Second Avenue; however they may cross Second Avenue at its intersection with 5th Street, 6th Street, 7th Street, 8th Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, 11th Street and 12th Street in accordance with all traffic regulations. W11-11 warning signs, as specified in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), shall be installed on 13th Street in both directions and in advance of Broadway to alert drivers of possible PTV crossings. 
(3)  PTV operators on public streets shall possess a valid unrestricted driver's license. 
(4)  PTV operators on public streets shall comply with all traffic laws and obey all traffic control devices. 
(5)  PTV operators on public streets shall not drive their PTV at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour, and the maximum speed limit for any other motor vehicle shall not exceed 25 miles per hour. 
(6)  PTV operators on public streets shall be subject to the same traffic citations and penalties as other vehicle operators. 
(7)  PTV operators on public streets shall park their PTV only in designated vehicle parking spaces and shall comply with all time limits for those spaces. Only one PTV shall occupy each vehicle parking space. PTVs shall not park in designated loading zones or in spaces designated for use by the disabled. 
(8)  PTV operators and passengers shall be seated at all times while the PTV is moving. No more than two adults shall occupy a single bench seat on the PTV. 
(9)  All PTVs shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330.1(a) regarding safety equipment. 
(10)  Each PTV operated on public street segments shall be properly registered and licensed by the Columbus Consolidated Government prior to their operation on public streets, as evidenced by a decal affixed to that vehicle. In order to obtain a decal, an application must be completed on a form promulgated by the finance director, which will among other items require proof of adequate liability insurance. Permits and decals will be provided for a total cost of $15.00 per PTV and will expire every five years. Operation of a PTV on any approved public street segment without displaying a decal shall constitute a violation of chapter 20 of this Code and be subject to the penalties set forth in Code section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 15-8, § 1, 3-31-15) 
Chapter 21 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, repealed the former Ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-14, and enacted a new Ch. 21 as set out herein. The former Ch. 21 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete list of derivations, see Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 21-1. - Declaration of policy. 
The Council of Columbus, Georgia, hereby declares its concern with the public welfare and safety with regard to the usage and operation of taxicabs within Columbus and hereby declares its policy to be to allow the use of taxicabs on the public streets, and adopts this chapter with concern for the quality of service to be offered to the general public by taxicab company owners and drivers. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Chairperson means the Chairperson, Columbus Taxicab Commission. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police for the Columbus, Georgia Police Department or designee. 
Commission means the Columbus Taxicab Commission as defined under section 21-11 of the Columbus Code. 
Company means any person(s), association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
Company lot means the lot maintained by a company for the purpose of parking vehicles and other functions in the operation of vehicles for hire business. 
Controlled substance means those narcotics, drugs or other compounds as defined by state or federal law. 
Conviction includes bond forfeitures, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere and is dated from the time a sentence, including probation, is completed. 
Dispatch log means a daily record, prepared by the taxicab company owner, of all trips made by the taxicab(s) operated by the company, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the amount of fare. 
Driver's permit means the license issued by the chief of police to any person to enable that person to drive a taxicab and pick up passengers upon the streets of Columbus. 
Driver shall mean a permitted taxicab driver. 
Fees means nonrefundable payments required by this chapter. 
Highways means any of the public streets, roads, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys of Columbus, Georgia. 
Licensed garage means a validly licensed garage under contract with the city to perform taxicab safety and taximeter inspections and certify the results. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousine with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
Limousine service means the service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of limousines operated by chauffeurs, on the basis of telephone contract, written contract or other prearrangement. 
Moral turpitude means an act of baseness, vileness, or depravity in the private and social duties that a person owes to fellow persons, or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty between persons, but does not include the crime of writing bad checks. 
Taxicab safety and taximeter inspection certification means the certification received from a licensed garage, certifying that the taxicab is mechanically safe in compliance with state laws regarding vehicle safety including emission control, tires, brakes, wipers, lights, safety belts and airbags, windshields, air conditioning and all other factory equipment and mechanical systems and that the taximeter is calibrated and accurate. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle for hire, including vans, with three or more passenger doors, that seats 15 or fewer passengers, that operates on call or demand and transports passengers and their luggage, if any, between two points designated by the passenger and that calculates the fare by means of a taximeter. 
Taxicab company owner means an individual, partnership, or corporation that owns the trade name for a taxicab company and has purchased the necessary business license(s) from Columbus, Georgia, to operate such taxicab company. 
Taxicab owner's business license means a license approved by the chief of police and the Columbus Council authorizing the holder thereof to operate a taxicab company in Columbus, Georgia. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting and to indicate the fares to be charged. 
Use of narcotic drugs means compounds defined as a controlled substance by state or federal law, with or without medical need or authority or prescription. 
Van means any vehicle other than a sedan-type vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than seven and not more than 15 passengers. 
Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle, or other vehicle or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the charges for use of which are determined by agreement, mileage or by length of time for which the vehicle is engaged. Excluded from this definition are interurban buses and vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. 
Waiting time means the time during which a taxicab interrupts its journey at the request of a passenger so as to allow the passenger to conduct necessary business by either remaining with the taxicab or disembarking from the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 12-59, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 21-3. - Taxicab owner's business license. 
(1)  No company owner shall operate, or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by the owner to be operated, on the streets of Columbus, Georgia, without first obtaining a taxicab company owner's business license for the location from which that taxicab operates. The taxicab company owner's business license application form shall be obtained from the chief of police. The application form shall require the following information and documents: 
(a)  Trade name of taxicab company to be operated. 
(b)  Owner's name and home address, if an individual. 
(c)  Names and addresses of all partners, if a partnership. 
(d)  Name and address of corporation president, and shareholders holding 25 percent or more stock, if a corporation. 
(e)  Business address of taxicab company from which taxicabs will operate and the location of the off street parking lot for the taxicabs. 
(f)  Assurance of ability to provide dispatch taxi service 24 hours per day, 365 days a year. 
(g)  General description of identifying words and color scheme of the taxicab(s). 
(h)  Certificate of occupancy, if company is located within Columbus, Georgia or if the company is located outside of Columbus a business license issued by the appropriate authority of that jurisdiction; 
(i)  An assurance that the telephone number of the taxicab company will be listed in the next Columbus, Georgia telephone directory issued; 
(j)  An assurance that the applicant will meet the insurance requirements of section 21-3.3. 
(k)  The applicant's complete record of criminal arrests and convictions, including those for traffic violations, during the past five years. If an applicant is a corporation, association or partnership, the criminal record of the officers, directors, partners and supervising employees thereof, including general manager, if any; 
(l)  Signed waiver(s) for a criminal background check from all persons listed in subparagraph (k). 
(2)  The chief of police shall recommend approval or disapproval of all applications for a taxicab company owner's business license to the Columbus Council. A recommendation of disapproval shall be accompanied by a written explanation. Columbus Council has the authority to approve or deny the application, subject to the later payment of licensing fees, acquisition of insurance and telephone listing. 
(3)  Upon the council's approval of the taxicab company owner's business license, the taxicab company owner may proceed to the occupational tax division of the finance department where upon payment of the licensing fee and proof of insurance in accordance with section 21-3.3 and Georgia state law, the taxicab company owner's business license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-3.1. - Renewals. 
Taxicab company owner's business licenses expire December 31 of each year. Taxicab company owner shall submit renewal application, fees, insurance information and signed waiver for criminal background check to the Office of Revenue Collection division of Columbus, Georgia. Licenses not renewed by April 1 of that year, are subject to revocation and nonrenewal. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-3.2. - Persons prohibited. 
(a)  No person who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bond on any federal or state felony offense within five years of the application for a taxicab company owner's business license shall be issued such a license, nor shall such license be renewed. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bond on any federal or state misdemeanor offense or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude or alcohol or drugs or prostitution or pimping or other sexual matters within three years of application for taxicab company owner's business license shall be issued such a license, nor shall any such license be renewed; except, for renewal purposes only, two alcohol offenses shall be required to prohibit renewal. 
(c)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on five ordinance violations involving taxicabs in Columbus, Georgia, or any other political subdivision within one year of the application for taxicab company owner's business license shall be issued such a license, nor shall any such license be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-3.3. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every company owner of every taxicab engaged in the business of transporting passengers in Columbus shall secure and keep in effect for each taxicab operated a policy of liability and property damage insurance with a company duly authorized to do business in Georgia in an amount not less than that required by Georgia law. Such policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his servants or agents. A certificate of insurance certifying such coverage shall be filed with the finance department and in the office of chief of police at the time of licensing. 
(b)  The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company issuing the policy required by this section shall give the taxicab inspector not less than 30 days' advance written notice of any cancellation, reduction in coverage or other material change in the policy. 
(c)  Every certificate holder shall, upon the receipt of any notice of cancellation of the insurance required by this section, immediately notify the chief of police of such cancellation. Continued operation of the taxicab associated with the cancelled insurance shall result in the immediate suspension of the owner's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-3.4. - Registration/inspection of vehicles required. 
Taxicab company owners shall be responsible for registering their taxicabs with the Columbus Police Department and must obtain a registration/inspection permit. The following procedures shall apply: 
(a)  The taxicab company owner shall be responsible for submitting a completed registration application, in a form supplied by the Columbus Police Department, to the Columbus Police Department each year: 
(1)  Taxicab company owner's name and address and identifying information for each taxicab owned to include make, model, tag, VIN, taxicab company vehicle number, insurance). 
(2)  Safety and taximeter inspection certification from a licensed garage approved by the Columbus Police Department. 
(b)  After submission of a completed registration application and a satisfactory taxicab safety and taximeter certification, the Columbus Police Department, or its designee, shall inspect interior and exterior of taxicab(s) for cleanliness, body damage, proper identification numbers, proper display of maximum rates of fare, proper display of a barcoded sticker provided by the taxicab commission providing contact information and a link to its website on the rear interior passenger window of each taxicab, and inspection of the taximeter for accuracy and proper operation. For each taxicab of the taxicab company owner's that pass inspection and the registration application and safety certification are complete, the Columbus Police Department shall issue a registration/inspection permit, valid for one year. 
(c)  The taxicab company owner shall be responsible for properly installing and displaying the annual Columbus Police Department registration/inspection permit on the left rear bumper area of each taxicab. Permits are not transferable from one taxicab to another. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 12-59, § 2, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 21-3.5. - Grounds for revocation. 
The following shall be grounds for revocation of a taxicab company owner's business license: 
(a)  Failure to maintain telephone service, 24 hours a day, seven days a week to handle requests for taxicab service from the general public. 
(b)  Failure to maintain taxicab service availability in Columbus, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(c)  Failure to maintain a dispatch log of all calls for taxicab service, which includes information concerning dates, times and locations of each pick up and their drop times and areas. 
(d)  Failure to maintain the same general identifying words, numbers, and color schemes, listed in the taxicab business license application, on all taxicabs in operation of the business. 
(e)  Failure to notify the Columbus Police Department, in writing, of the dismissal of any driver from employment/contract with the taxicab company within 48 hours. 
(f)  Failure to notify the Columbus Police Department, in writing, of the removal of a taxicab from service with the taxicab company within 48 hours. 
(g)  Failure to obtain and display an annual taxicab registration/inspection permit from the Columbus Police Department on each vehicle that is utilized by the taxicab company as a taxicab. 
(h)  Failure to train and test each new driver under the guidelines established by the taxicab commission and section 21-4(b). 
(i)  Running a taxicab company where violations of federal law, state law or Columbus ordinances frequently or regularly occur so as to cause the chief of police to recommend a revocation of the license. 
(j)  Commission of any act in violation of federal law, state law or Columbus ordinances that would disqualify a person from obtaining a license under section 21-3.2. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-3.6. - Revocation procedure. 
The following procedures shall be followed in revoking a taxicab company owner's business license: 
(a)  Notice shall be given to the holder of a license at least two weeks in advance that the Columbus Council will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked, and this notice shall include the specific grounds on which this recommendation to Council will be made. 
(b)  The clerk of council shall notify the license holder, the director of finance and the chief of police or director of public safety as to the time that a recommendation will be heard. 
(c)  The Columbus Council shall hear a recommendation for revocation before or during one of its regular meetings at which time the holder of a license and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(d)  No license shall be revoked until a majority of the council so decides at the time of, or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(e)  After council takes action to revoke, licensee will surrender the taxicab company owner's business licenses to the issuing authority. 
(f)  The procedures for revoking a taxicab company owner's business license shall also apply to non-renewals of taxicab company owner's business licenses. Hearings before the Columbus Council on revocations shall be held within 30 days from the date of a decision to recommend revocation, while council hearings on non-renewals shall be held 30 days from the receipt of an appeal by a licensee of a decision not to renew. Hearings on non-renewals shall be held no earlier than one week from the date an appeal is received, and licensees shall be notified in writing in advance of the date of said hearing. 
(g)  Taxicab company owners wishing to appeal the decision of the Columbus Council shall file a petition for certiorari in Muscogee County Superior Court. 
(h)  If a taxicab company owner's business license is either revoked or nonrenewed under this section, no such license shall be issued to the same licensee until the expiration of the applicable time periods set forth in section 21-3.2, persons prohibited. The term "same licensee" includes the revoked or nonrenewed licensee's spouse or cohabitant, and any relative of the original licensee within the second degree of consanguinity, which term includes a step, adopted, or footer, parent, sibling, grandparent, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, and first cousin. The term "same licensee" also includes any partner or stockholder of the original licensee's partnership or corporation, or any person who has acquired the original licensee's business other than through a bona fide sale. The burden is upon the new owner to prove that the sale of the business is bona fide. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-4. - Taxicab driver permit. 
(a)  In order to obtain a taxicab driver permit, an applicant must submit to the chief of police each year a signed application form provided by the Columbus Police Department. The initial application shall require the following information and documents: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Name and address of the taxicab company employing the applicant; 
(3)  Written statement from a taxicab company owner that the applicant will be affiliated as a driver with the company upon issuance of a permit and that the applicant exhibits a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders from police and others in lawful authority. 
(4)  A written statement dated within 30 days of application from a licensed physician certifying that the applicant has no physical infirmities that would adversely affect the applicant's ability to drive. 
(5)  Proof of a valid state driver's license, which is not to be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-64. 
(6)  Proof that the driver is at least 18 years of age. 
(7)  Proof that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(8)  Proof that the applicant successfully completed a driver's training course, which is approved by the commission, for new applicants administered by a taxicab company. 
(b)  The driver's training course shall include but not be limited to information on laws and sections of this Code and other ordinances governing the operation of vehicles for hire including the location of streets, landmarks, institutions, driver courtesy, driving safety, and attractions within the metropolitan area. The commission shall provide training materials in these subjects to instructors employed by the companies for the purpose of teaching driver's training courses. Receiving a passing score of at least 70 percent shall indicate successful completion of the course. The examination may be administered orally, but any applicant who fails three times may not take it again for a period of 30 days. 
(c)  Failure to provide correct information shall result in denial of the license and may result in criminal prosecution for false swearing. 
(d)  Columbus Police Department shall provide a copy of chapter 21 of the Columbus Code to each driver at the time a driver receives an original taxicab driver permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-4.1. - Taxicab driver permit renewals. 
(a)  Taxicab driver permits are valid for a period of one year following the birth date of the driver. Renewals may be accomplished up to 30 days prior to the birth date of the driver and are delinquent on the birth date if not renewed. The cost of a driver's permit shall be $10.00. Permits are purchased from the Columbus Police Department. Delinquent or expired permits may be renewed upon payment of $15.00. The reissuance of a driver's permit for any reason will require payment of a $10.00 fee. 
(b)  Every fourth year after obtaining the initial driver's permit, the driver shall submit with the application for renewal a physician's written statement certifying that the driver has no disease or mental or physical infirmity that adversely affects the driver's ability to drive. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-5. - Criminal record of driver applicant. 
(1)  Before issuing any driver permit to a taxicab driver applicant, the chief of police shall make a background check of the applicant to determine whether or not the applicant has a criminal record. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued nor renewed to any applicant who has: 
(a)  Within the last five years received a conviction for a federal or state felony. 
(b)  Within the last three years received a conviction for misdemeanor or ordinance violation relating to immoral purposes to include but not limited to: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Soliciting for prostitution; 
3.  Any sex related offense; 
4.  Alcohol offense; 
5.  Drug offense; 
6.  Fraud; and 
7.  Gambling. 
(c)  Within the last three years received a conviction for any of the following offenses (unless the five year felony rule applies): 
1.  DUI; 
2.  Reckless driving; 
3.  Hit and run; 
4.  Vehicular homicide; 
5.  Serious injury by vehicle; 
6.  Suspended driver's license; 
7.  Road rage; and, 
8.  Overcharging a passenger. 
(d)  Within one year of the application for a driver's permit received a conviction for either bad checks or four or more moving traffic violations under either state or local or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-6. - Denials, revocations, nonrenewals and suspensions. 
(1)  The chief of police shall have the power to suspend, deny, revoke, or refuse to renew any driver's permit as a result of violations of this chapter or as a result of any occurrence which would make the driver ineligible for a permit under section 21-5, but no such suspension, denial, revocation or nonrenewal shall be made without first informing the driver and the company owner of the reasons therefore and without first giving such driver an opportunity to respond. 
(2)  A denial, revocation, nonrenewal or suspension of a permit by the chief of police shall not be subject to direct appeal to the Columbus Council, but must first go before the Columbus Taxicab Commission for a recommendation to the Columbus Council. 
(3)  Drivers shall have ten days from the receipt of the written decision of the chief of police to file a written application with the clerk of council for a hearing with the commission. The commission shall hold a hearing at its next scheduled meeting. Within ten days of hearing the appeal, the commission shall issue a written recommendation to the driver and the Columbus Council either supporting or objecting to the chief of police's action. The driver may then appeal the chief of police's decision within 20 days of the issuance of the commission's decision. If the commission takes no action within ten days from the date of the hearing, then the driver may appeal, in a writing filed with the clerk of council, to the Columbus Council within 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(4)  Appeal from the decision of council shall be by petition for certiorari in Muscogee County Superior Court. 
(5)  Denials, revocations and nonrenewals of permits shall be effective for a period of one year, unless a longer period is required by section 21-5, but the chief of police, as an alternative to revocation, may suspend permits for a period of less than one year; and such suspensions will be subject to the same reasons and procedures as those governing denials, revocations or nonrenewals. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-7. - Duties of taxicab drivers. 
(1)  Transportation for illegal activities. No driver shall knowingly solicit or transport persons for the purpose of illegal activity. 
(2)  Refusal to carry orderly persons. No driver shall refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person upon request, unless driver is previously engaged or is unable or forbidden to do so by provisions of Columbus ordinance or state law. If a person requesting taxi service is drunk or disorderly and the driver has reason to believe such person may do the driver bodily harm, the driver may refuse service to that person. No driver shall be obligated to transport anyone under the age of 12, unless such person is accompanied by another person who is 12 years of age, or older. 
(3)  Theft of calls. No driver or company shall monitor the dispatch of any other company for the purpose of stealing their business. 
(4)  Number of passengers. No driver shall carry passengers in excess of taxicab's seating capacity, but infants in arms shall not be counted as passengers either for the purpose of collection of additional fares or for the purpose of counting seating capacity. 
(5)  Inspection of taxicabs. Drivers shall maintain taxicabs in proper mechanical condition so as to be safe and shall also maintain taxicabs in a state of cleanliness in conformance with section 21-8. 
(6)  Boarding and discharging passengers. 
(a)  Drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the sidewalk or curb on the right-hand side of the roadway, and there receive or discharge passengers. 
(b)  Drivers shall receive and discharge passengers through the door or doors away from the vehicular portion of the streets. 
(7)  Soliciting patronage. Drivers shall not leave their vehicles for the purpose of soliciting patronage at any public place. 
(8)  Dress code. Drivers shall be clean in person and dress at all times. The following standards apply: 
(a)  Drivers must wear shoes, sneakers, or sandals but no flip-flops or shower shoes. 
(b)  Shirts and dresses must have either short or long sleeves and cover the torso so that the breast, buttock and stomach are covered. 
(c)  Pants, skirts, dresses and shorts shall be no shorter than two inches above the knee and any slits on such clothing shall reach no further up the leg. 
(d)  All clothing shall be opaque such that no body part required to be covered by subparagraphs (b) and (c) will be visible. 
(9)  Display of permit. Drivers shall display their drivers' permits by affixing the permit to the interior of their taxicabs in a manner and location so that the permit remains in view of the passenger at all times. 
(10)  Deceiving of passengers prohibited. Drivers shall not deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may desire to ride in their taxicabs as to the destination or the rate of fare to be charged, nor shall drivers convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger to a place other than the one designated by the passenger. Drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of their passengers as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken. Drivers shall maintain the rate card in plain view at all times in their taxicabs. 
(11)  Property left in taxicab. Drivers shall thoroughly search the interior of their taxicabs at the termination of each trip for any articles that may be left in such taxicabs by a passenger. Any articles found therein shall be immediately returned to the passenger owning it, if such be known, otherwise the driver shall deposit it with the taxicab company as soon as discovered. 
(12)  Logs. Drivers shall report all trips carrying passengers to the taxicab company dispatcher and include pickup time, location of pickup and destination. 
(13)  Map of the metropolitan area. Drivers shall maintain in each taxicab a suitable map or street guide of the Columbus metropolitan area. 
(14)  Receipts. Drivers shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the taxicab company, cab number, date of transaction, and driver's signature. 
(15)  Non-paying passengers. Drivers shall not transport non-paying passengers while transporting a paying passenger except for the purpose of driver training. 
(16)  Drivers shall not smoke or play a radio, tape player, CD player, DVD player, or TV VCR if objected to by the passenger. 
(17)  Drivers shall provide the Columbus Police Department with written notice of any change in address within five days of such change. 
(18)  Taxicab drivers shall not require any passenger to pay an extra charge for accompaniment by a guide or service dog permitted under O.C.G.A. § 30-4-2. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 10-45, § 1, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 21-8. - Inspection/registration of taxicabs. 
(a)  All operating taxicabs shall display a current registration/inspection permit obtained from the Columbus Police Department, in accordance with the procedures set for in section 21-3.4 above on the left hand side of the taxicab's rear bumper. Each registration/inspection permit issued by the Columbus Police Department shall be valid from the inspection date through May 31 of the following calendar year. Both drivers and taxicab owners are responsible for complying with the above requirements. Inspections for taxicabs being newly placed into service may be accomplished at any time as set forth by the Columbus Police Department. Renewal inspections for existing taxicabs already in service may be accomplished during the expiration year between January 1 and May 31. 
(b)  Drivers shall maintain taxicabs in proper mechanical condition so as to be safe and shall also maintain taxicabs in a state of cleanliness, to include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Exterior. Drivers and taxicab company owners shall maintain taxicabs in a state of cleanliness and proper mechanical condition to include: headlights, tail lights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield, vent glass, windshield wipers, all other vehicle glass, glass window raisers, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, interior door handles, exhaust system, splash shields, hubcaps, bumpers, fenders, body and tires. 
(2)  Interior. Drivers and taxicab company owners shall maintain in proper mechanical condition and cleanliness: the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes and air conditioning and heating systems to ascertain that each is functioning properly. They shall maintain the upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartments to determine whether they are clean, free of tears, and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger's luggage. They shall ensure that taxicabs shall contain a fire extinguisher, a spare tire, a jack, and a functional communications device (i.e. two-way radio, cellular phone) that shall serve as a means of communicating between the company and the driver. 
(3)  No driver shall operate a taxicab without a valid inspection/registration sticker issued by the Columbus Police Department, and affixed to the left rear bumper. 
(4)  Correction slip. If a taxicab fails to pass the requirements of either inspection, a correction slip shall be issued to the driver listing the items that need correction, and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a Taxicab until it has successfully passed inspection. 
(5)  Willful failure to have a taxicab inspected as required under this section shall be grounds for suspension of the driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 12-59, § 3, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 21-8.1. - Identification of taxicabs. 
The chief of police shall have the power to revoke or deny the registration/inspection of a taxicab where the color scheme or company name is deemed similar to the color scheme or name of another taxicab company so as to confuse the public as to the identity of the different taxicab companies. The taxicab company name shall be affixed on the taxicab's right and left front doors and rear trunk area in letters no less than three inches in height, and in a contrasting color to the background color. The maximum fares set forth in paragraphs (a) and (d) of section 21-9 shall be displayed on the left and right rear sides of the taxicab, in letters no less than one inch in height, and in contrasting colors different than the background. Although, a lower flat or discounted rate for any particular trip may be offered to the customer, only the maximum fare set by ordinance shall be displayed on the exterior of the cab in compliance with this provision. Additionally, identifying numbers assigned by a taxicab company shall be affixed on the left and right front fenders and rear trunk area, in numbers no less than three inches in height, in a contrasting color to the background color. When a taxicab is removed from service with a taxicab company, the owner of the taxicab shall remove or permanently cover all taxicab signs, rate signs, and company pickup tags from such taxicab before the owner can operate such vehicle on the streets of Columbus. The chief of police shall have the power to revoke or to deny the registration/inspection of a taxicab for failing to meet any of the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 21-8.2. - Taximeters and exterior dome lights. 
Drivers and taxicab company owners shall equip all taxicabs with a taximeter fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times, with the face of the taximeter to be illuminated after sunset. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the flexible or permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections that, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall be equipped with an on-off switch denoting when the taxicab is employed and when it is not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the switch of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. Taximeters may be subject to inspection from time to time by the Columbus Police Department. Additionally, all taxicabs shall be equipped with a permanently mounted exterior roof dome light not less than five inches in height bearing the term "taxi" or the name of the taxicab company. Said dome light shall be connected to an on-off switch so that during the hours of darkness, it will denote when on, that the vehicle is not employed but available for hire and when off, that it is not available for hire. Both drivers and taxicab company owners are responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 12-59, § 4, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 21-9. - Maximum rates of fare. 
The maximum allowable rates of fare are as follows: 
(a)  Each taximeter shall run throughout each trip and shall provide for a maximum rate for one passenger of $2.00 for the first one-sixth mile or fraction thereof, and $0.33 for each additional one-sixth mile or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Any flat rate or discounted fare offered a passenger must be equal to or less than the shown metered fare upon arrival at the passenger's destination. 
(c)  Waiting time shall not be more than $0.35 per minute and shall not exceed $21.00 per hour. 
(d)  Every taxicab shall be private except that, with the consent of passengers occupying the taxicab, additional passengers may be conveyed for a portion, or the entire trip desired by the passenger first occupying such taxicab. When additional passengers are picked up, no more than $2.00 shall be added for each additional passenger. Seniors over 55, children under 12, care givers, guides and service animals are exempt from the additional passenger fee. 
(e)  For the delivery of food or merchandise unaccompanied by passengers, $3.00 plus the cab fare from the point of picking up the food or merchandise to the point of delivery may be charged. 
(f)  The pullout fee from the Columbus Metropolitan Airport shall not exceed the amount set forth by the Columbus Airport Commission. 
(g)  The maximum fares set forth in paragraphs (a) and (d) of this section shall be displayed on the left and right rear sides of the taxicab, in letters no less than one inch in height, and in contrasting colors different than the background. Although, a lower flat rate or discounted fare may be offered to a passenger, only the maximum fare set by ordinance shall be displayed on the exterior of the cab in compliance with this provision. In addition, the exterior of the cab may, if applicable, display a statement indicating that lower or discounted fares may be available. 
(h)  A driver's permit shall be automatically revoked for three years upon the conviction of a driver for overcharging a passenger or customer. 
(i)  No maximum fares set forth herein shall be interpreted to prohibit a driver from collecting and remitting sales tax on the fares charged as required by the laws and regulations of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 12-50, § 1, 11-27-12; Ord. No. 13-22, § 3, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 21-10. - Penalty for violation of chapter provisions. 
No taxicab company owner shall allow, and no employee, contractor or driver thereof shall engage in any activity that violates any provision of chapter 21 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances. Any person violating the provisions of chapter 21 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code, or by both fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine and imprisonment, any violation of chapter 21 shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of all licenses by the Columbus Council under procedures contained in Columbus Code section 21-3.6. Upon the license of any taxicab company owner being revoked by the Council, the license shall be surrendered to the issuing authority. No taxicab business license will be issued to any owner, employee, relative, or partner of the same company or any location with the same company name for a period of two years after the revocation or non-renewal. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 21-11. - Columbus taxicab commission. 
There is hereby created a Columbus Taxicab Commission to be composed of nine commissioners appointed by the Columbus Council and consisting of two taxicab company owners, one driver, one representative selected by the Columbus Chamber of Commerce, one representative selected by the chief of police, one representative of the Columbus Airport, one of the hotel/motel industry, and two at large commissioners. The term of office for members of the commission shall be four years and members shall be eligible to serve two consecutive full terms; provided, however, the Columbus Council may allow an extension of two additional full terms for members of this commission. The first three members of the commission appointed after January 1, 2003 shall serve an initial term of two years. The fourth, fifth, and sixth members of the commission appointed after January 1, 2003 shall serve an initial term of three years. The seventh, eighth and ninth members of the commission appointed after January 1, 2003 shall serve an initial term of four years. After service of these initial terms, members of the commission may serve two additional full terms upon approval of the Columbus Council for each term of office. The commission shall ensure that drivers are properly educated as to serving the public and shall ensure that drivers are courteous to citizens, are familiar with the territory of Columbus, Georgia, shall ensure that taxicab company owners and drivers maintain cleanliness and safety of all taxicabs and shall ensure that ordinance provisions including regulations governing taxicab fees and charges are followed by all drivers and taxicab company owners. The commission will also hear appeals based upon written application due to a denial, revocation, nonrenewal or suspension of a permit by the chief of police. Within ten days of hearing the appeal, the commission shall issue a written recommendation to the Columbus Council, with a copy to each of the parties, either supporting or objecting to the action of the chief of police. The applicant may then file a written appeal of the chief of police's decision with the clerk of council, within 20 days of the issuance of the commission's decision. If the commission takes no action within ten days from the date of the hearing, the applicant may then file a written appeal to the Columbus Council with the clerk of council within 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 8-10-04) 
APPENDIX A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) in this appendix was adopted on December 14, 2004 and became effective March 1, 2005. No substantive changes have been made to the text however obvious misspellings have been corrected and a uniform system of capitalization has been used. Any provisions appearing in brackets were added for purposes of clarity. Amendments are indicated in history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. 

Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE AND INTENT 

Section 1.1.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) for the City of Columbus is to provide for the health, safety morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the residents and property owners of the City of Columbus and Muscogee County; to provide to provide development standards, criteria, and regulations consistent with the City's comprehensive plan; and to exercise the planning and zoning authority granted by the applicable provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Planning Law of 1989, and other applicable provisions of the Annotated Code of Georgia. The purpose and intent of this Chapter also are to achieve the benefits listed below. 
A.  Health, Safety and Welfare. Protect, provide for, and further the public health, safety and general welfare of the City. 
B.  Orderly Development. Consolidate and streamline the development procedures and guide and encourage the orderly and beneficial development of future growth and development of the City consistent with the City's comprehensive plan. 
C.  Land Use. Provide for more appropriate use of land throughout the City and to enhance and protect the value of all property within the City. 
D.  Light, Air and Privacy. Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger; and prevent overcrowding of the land. 
E.  Aesthetics. Protect and enhance the aesthetics and character of all parts of the City. 
F.  Public Service. Provide for adequate public services, including roads and transportation, potable water, sanitary sewer, schools, parks and other public requirement. 
G.  Value of Land. Protect and conserve the value of land, buildings and improvements and minimize conflicts among uses of land and buildings. 
H.  Zoning Districts. Divide the City into districts, restricting and regulating therein the construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other specified uses. 
I.  Property Development Regulations. Establish building setback lines, regulate the bulk and height of buildings, and provide for related property development regulations. 
J.  Greenways and Open Space. Provide for greenways and open spaces, and conserve and preserve environmentally sensitive lands and vegetation. 
K.  Traffic. Avoid traffic congestion on streets and eliminate conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular movements. 
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1.2.1. - Title. 
The title of the document shall be the "Unified Development Ordinance" (UDO) for the City of Columbus. 
Section 1.2.2. - Authority. 
This UDO is adopted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, and other applicable portion of the Annotated Code of Georgia. 
Section 1.2.3. - Effective Date. 
This UDO shall become effective as of March 1, 2005. 
Section 1.2.4. - Construction of Words and Phrases. 
The following general rules of construction shall govern the interpretation of words and phrases used in this UDO. 
A.  Building. The term "building" includes the word "structure." 
B.  Erected or Altered. The term "erected" or "altered" includes the term "constructed, reconstructed, restored, extended or structurally altered." 
C.  Lot. The term "lot" includes the terms "plot," "tract," or "parcel." 
D.  Map. The term "map" means the Official Zoning Map of the City of Columbus. 
E.  May. The term "may" is permissive. 
F.  Person. The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
G.  Shall and Will. The term "shall" is mandatory, as is the term "will." 
H.  Singular and Plural. The singular word or number includes the plural, and the plural word number includes the singular. 
I.  Tenses. The present tense includes the future tenses. 
J.  Used or Occupied. The term "used" or "occupied" includes the terms "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
K.  Federal or State Law. Reference to federal or state law shall include all future amendments to such laws, as applicable. 
L.  Documents. Reference to official documents utilized as part of this UDO, shall include all future amendments, as applicable. 
Section 1.2.5. - Minimum Requirements or Standards. 
A.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this UDO will be construed broadly to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Conflict with Other Public Provisions. The provisions of the UDO are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law, except those which are in conflict with these provided for herein. Where any provision of the UDO imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision herein or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, the provision, which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards will control. 
C.  Identification of Certain Officials. The identification of certain officials, including the City Manager, Director of Planning, City Engineer, and other similar officials, shall also include the designee of such official. 
D.  Review by City Attorney. The City Attorney shall review and approve all legal agreements and documents, and all documents to be recorded. 
E.  Application of District Regulations. 
1.  Zoning Districts. The regulations within each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as may be provided elsewhere in this UDO. 
2.  Other Regulations. Unless otherwise provided in these land development regulations, all applicable standards and requirements shall apply to all structures and uses permitted within the City. 
F.  Definitions. Definitions of words and phrases for the use, administration and interpretation of these land development regulations are provided in Chapter 13. 
G.  Conformity. All buildings, structures, lands, and properties shall be used, developed, occupied, erected, altered, moved, or otherwise improved in conformity with the provisions of this UDO. 
H.  Prohibitions. Buildings or other structures shall not be erected or altered: 
1.  To exceed the height or bulk standards permitted by this UDO; 
2.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families or individuals than permitted herein; 
3.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area than required by this UDO; 
4.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open paces than required by this UDO; or 
5.  In any other manner contrary to the provisions of this UDO. 
Section 1.2.6. - Official Zoning Map. 
A.  Adoption. The City is divided into zoning districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Columbus, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDO. 
B.  Changes in Zoning Map. 
1.  When Amended. The Official Zoning Map shall be amended at the same time when a zoning district boundary change (rezoning) is approved by the Council. 
2.  Retention of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the Planning Division on behalf of the Clerk of Council. 
Section 1.2.7. - Zoning District Boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the rules stated below shall apply. 
A.  Rivers, Streams, and Canals. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, railroads, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
C.  County Limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following County limits shall be construed as following such County limits. 
D.  Distances. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map or contained in the legal description contained in the ordinance to amend the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Map. 
E.  Parallel Lines and Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in this Section shall be so construed. 
F.  Platted Lot Lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
G.  Rights-of-way Vacations. If a street or other public right-of-way is vacated, where a district boundary is indicated following the right-of-way line at the edge of the street, such boundaries shall be construed as moving to the centerline of the vacated street. 
H.  Specific Dimensions. Where specific dimensions indicate district boundaries, such specific dimensions shall control. 
I.  Interpretation. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at a variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by this Section, the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall interpret the district boundaries. 
Section 1.2.8. - Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses. 
A.  Fees Authorized. The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure, for development applications, building permits, certificates, appeals, and all other matters pertaining to the administration and implementation of the UDO. The schedule of fees shall be available in the Department. Fees may be altered or amended only by the Council only in accordance with Georgia Law, to include, but not limited to, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
B.  Payment of Fees. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application, appeal, or other matter affected by the UDO. 
Chapter 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2.1.1. - Establishment. 
The zoning districts created in Table 2.1.1 are hereby established. Additional zoning districts and overlay zoning districts may be established as an amendment to this UDO. 
Table 2.1.1.  Zoning Districts and Zoning District Conversion Chart 

 
Section 2.1.2. - Zoning Districts and Compatible Land Use Plan Categories. 
The following zoning districts are intended to implement the comprehensive plan. Each district is only appropriate in the land use plan category where it effectively implements the plan, as set forth in Table 2.1.2. 
Table 2.1.2.  Zoning Districts and Future Land Use Designations 

 
(Ord. No. 08-71, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 2.1.3. - Applicable Regulations. 
Regulations applicable to each zoning district are established in this Chapter and in other Chapters of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
Section 2.1.4. - Permitted, Special Exception and Prohibited Uses. 
Permitted, special exception and prohibited uses in all zoning districts shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Permitted and special exception uses are provided in Chapter 3. 
B.  Additional Standards. Additional standards applicable to permitted and special exception uses are indicated by an "*" in the Notes column of Table 3.1.1 of Chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.1.5. - Property Development Regulations. 
Property within all zoning district shall comply with the standards as indicated in this Section. 
A.  Residential and Historic Zoning Districts. Property development regulations for residential and historic zoning districts are established in each zoning district and are consolidated in Table 2.2.1. 
B.  Commercial Zoning Districts. Property development regulations for commercial zoning districts are established in Table 2.3.1. 
C.  Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning Districts. Property development regulations for manufacturing/industrial zoning districts are established in Table 2.4.1. 
D.  Exception for Conservation Subdivisions. Compliance with minimum property development regulations for residential zoning districts, including minimum lot size, minimum lot width, minimum setbacks and maximum lot coverage, is not required for all residential lots included within a conservation subdivision established in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 6. 
Section 2.1.6. - Accessory Structures. 
Accessory structures in all zoning districts shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Minimum Property Standards for Attached Residential Accessory Structures. Residential accessory structures shall comply with all property development standards of the principal structure. 
B.  Minimum Property Standards for Detached Residential Accessory Structures. 
1.  Minimum and Maximum Property Standards . Minimum and maximum standards shall comply with Table 2.1.3 for HIST, RT, SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, RMF1, RMF2, AND RO residential zoning districts and Table 2.1.4 for residential estate zoning districts. 
Table 2.1.3.  Property Development Standards for Residential  Accessory Structures not in the RE Districts 

 
Table 2.1.4.  Property Development Standards for  Residential Estate Accessory Structures 

 
2.  Location. Accessory structures shall be located in the rear yard for all residential zoning districts, excluding the RE10 and RE5 zoning districts. 
C.  Minimum Property Standards for Detached Nonresidential Accessory Structures. Minimum and maximum standards shall comply with Table 2.1.5. 
Table 2.1.5.  Minimum Setbacks for Detached  Accessory Nonresidential Structures 

 
D.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 14-19, § 10, 5-27-14) 
ARTICLE 2. - STANDARD RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 2.2.1. - Property Development Regulations. 
Consolidated property development regulations for residential and historic zoning districts are provided in Table 2.2.1. 
Table 2.2.1.  Consolidated Property Development Regulations: Residential Zoning Districts 

 
Section 2.2.2. - Historic Zoning District—(HIST). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the HIST zoning district are established in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2.  Property Development Regulations: Historic Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Historic Zoning District (HIST) is the following: 
1.  To safeguard the architectural and historic heritage of Columbus, Georgia; 
2.  To promote the use of scenic and historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of citizens and its visitors; and 
3.  To provide and protect an environment suitable for residential and other uses compatible with those objectives. 
C.  Definitions. Definitions relating this Chapter are provided in Chapter 13. 
D.  Additional Standards. Historic properties shall include all properties designated as a HIST Zoning District in the zoning ordinance or on the Official Zoning Map of Columbus, Georgia. 
E.  Additional Review. Properties within the HIST zoning district are subject to review by the Board of Historic and Architectural Review (BHAR) as provided in Article 3 of Chapter 9. 
Section 2.2.3. - Residential Estate—10 Zoning District (RE10). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RE10 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.3. 
Table 2.2.3.  Property Development Regulations:  Residential Estate - 10 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RE10 zoning district is to provide a very low density residential zoning district that provides for large residential lots, limited agricultural uses, and the potential for clustered subdivisions that retain the rural character of the area. 
C.  Intent. The RE10 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Rural in character and generally are not affected by urban development; 
2.  Comprised of large numbers of acres in a single holding; 
3.  Located where urban services such as central water and sewer are not available; and 
4.  Considered to possess environmental and natural resources characteristics that should be encouraged to be retained in perpetuity. 
Section 2.2.4. - Residential Estate—5 Zoning District (RE5). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RE5 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.4. 
Table 2.2.4.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Estate—5 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RE5 zoning district is to provide a low density residential zoning district that provides for large residential lots, limited agricultural uses, and the potential for clustered subdivisions that retain the rural character of the area. 
C.  Intent. The RE5 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Rural in character and that generally is not affected by urban development; 
2.  Comprised of relatively large numbers of acres in a single holding; 
3.  Located where urban services such as central water and sewer are not available; and 
4.  Considered to possess environmental and natural resources characteristics that should be encouraged to be retained in perpetuity. 
Section 2.2.5. - Residential Estate—1 Zoning District (RE1). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RE1 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.5. 
Table 2.2.5.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Estate 1 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RE1 zoning district is to provide a moderate density residential zoning district that provides for large residential lots and the potential for clustered or conservation subdivisions that help retain a large degree of the rural character of the area. 
C.  Intent. The RE1 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Rural in character that is abutting or adjacent to suburban development; 
2.  Comprise of moderate numbers of acres in a single holding; 
3.  Located where urban services such as central water and sewer may be available; and 
4.  Considered to possess environmental and natural resources characteristics that should be encouraged to be retained in perpetuity. 
Section 2.2.6. - Residential Transitional Zoning District—(RT). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RT zoning district are established in Table 2.2.6. 
Table 2.2.6.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Transitional Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RT zoning district is to provide a lower density suburban residential zoning district that may be utilized as a transitional buffer between more dense suburban districts and land uses that may include larger lot districts or lands with an agricultural, rural or conservation orientation. 
C.  Intent. The RT zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of less than one unit per acre; 
2.  Existing with a present or future land use pattern of less than one unit per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a land use pattern with a rural orientation. 
Section 2.2.7. - Single-family Residential 1 Zoning District—(SFR1). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the SFR1 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.7. 
Table 2.2.7.  Property Development Regulations: Single-family Residential 1 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the SFR1 zoning district is to provide a lower density residential zoning district that protects a single-family dwelling residential character by prohibiting commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that preserve open space. 
C.  Intent. The SFR1 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of more than one unit per acre; 
2.  Existing with density of up to two and one-half units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a present and future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families. 
Section 2.2.8. - Single-family Residential 2 Zoning District—(SFR2). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the SFR2 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.8. 
Table 2.2.8.  Property Development Regulations: Single-family Residential 2 Zoning District. 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the SFR2 zoning district is to provide a moderate density residential zoning district that protects a single-family dwelling residential character by prohibiting commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that preserve open space. 
C.  Intent. The SFR2 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of more than one unit per acre; 
2.  Existing with a density of two to four units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a present and future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families. 
Section 2.2.9. - Single-family Residential 3 Zoning District—(SFR3). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the SFR3 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.9. 
Table 2.2.9.  Property Development Regulations: Single-family Residential 3 Zoning District. 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the SFR3 zoning district is to provide a medium density residential zoning district that protects single-family dwelling residential character by prohibiting commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that preserve open space. In addition, the zoning district also allows single-family zero lot line dwellings. 
C.  Intent. The SFR3 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of more than one unit per acre; 
2.  Existing with a density of three to five and one-half units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a present and future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families in detached and zero lot line dwellings. 
D.  Additional Requirement. A maintenance easement of at least five feet in width will be included as part of the required side yard for all zero lot line dwellings. 
Section 2.2.10. - Single-Family Residential 4 Zoning District—(SFR4). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the SFR4 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.10. 
Table 2.2.10.  Property Development Regulations: Single-family Residential 4 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the SFR4 zoning district is to provide a higher density residential zoning district while protecting residential character by prohibiting commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that preserve open space. 
C.  Intent. The SFR4 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of up to seven and one-half units per acre; 
2.  Existing with a density of five to seven and one-half units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a current or future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families in detached single-family dwellings. 
Section 2.2.11. - Residential Multifamily 1 Zoning District—(RMF1). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RMF1 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.11. 
Table 2.2.11.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Multifamily 1 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RMF1 zoning district is to provide a high density residential zoning district that allows a variety of dwelling types and maintains an overall residential character by allowing a limited number of commercial uses such as assisted or personal care facilities and bed and breakfast inns; prohibiting other commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that are consistent with higher density residential concentrations. 
C.  Intent. The RMF1 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of up to fourteen and one-half units per acre; 
2.  Existing with a density that may range from seven to eighteen units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a present or future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families in assisted and personal care facilities; detached, and zero lot line dwellings; multifamily dwellings; two family dwellings; and townhouses. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 5, 1-14-14) 
Section 2.2.12. - Residential Multifamily 2 Zoning District—(RMF2). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RMF2 zoning district are established in Table 2.2.12. 
Table 2.2.12.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Multifamily 2 Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RMF2 zoning district is to provide a high density residential zoning district that allows only multifamily dwelling types and maintains an overall residential character by allowing a limited number of commercial uses such as assisted, retirement or personal care facilities, and bed and breakfast inns; allowing secondary uses within office, and institutional, prohibiting other commercial uses; allowing uses that enhance residential areas, such as places of worship, elementary and secondary schools, and parks; and establishing property development regulations that are consistent with higher density residential concentrations. 
C.  Intent. The RMF2 zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of up to 16.5 units per acre; 
2.  Existing with a density that may range from seven to eighteen units per acre; and 
3.  Existing with a present or future land use pattern that reflects an area suitable for families in assisted and personal care facilities; multifamily dwellings; two family dwellings; and townhouses. 
D.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.2.13. - Residential Manufactured Home Zoning District—(RMH). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RMH zoning district are established in Table 2.2.13. 
Table 2.2.13.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Manufactured Home Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RMH zoning district is to provide a residential zoning district that may be utilized as an enhanced location for manufactured housing and mobile homes. 
C.  Intent. The RMH zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Approved for development at a density of approximately seven units per acre; 
2.  Existing with a land use pattern that has been developed as a location for manufactured and mobile home dwellings; and 
3.  Located in a site is suitable for manufactured and mobile home dwellings. 
ARTICLE 3. - STANDARD COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 2.3.1. - Property Development Regulations. 
Consolidated property development regulations for commercial zoning districts are provided in Table 2.3.1. 
Table 2.3.1.  Consolidated Property Development Regulations: Commercial Zoning Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 14-19, § 9, 5-27-14) 
Section 2.3.2. - Uptown Zoning District—(UPT). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the UPT zoning district are established in Table 2.3.2. 
Table 2.3.2.  Property Development Regulations: Uptown Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of zoning district is to provide a mixed use zoning district that provides for both high intensity commercial and high density residential uses in an area that is adjacent and complementary to the CRD zoning district. 
C.  Intent. The UPT zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located in an area where high density and intensity development is encouraged; 
2.  Located adjacent to the CRD zoning district; and 
3.  Capable of allowing complementary existing and future land uses that can attract employment, residential and entertainment activities in one extended area. 
D.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
E.  Existing Encroachments. Existing encroachments into a public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.23. 
F.  Additional Review. Properties within the UPT zoning district are subject to review by the Uptown Facade Board as provided in Section 9.2.5 and the BHAR as provided in Article 7 of Chapter 9. 
Section 2.3.3. - Central Riverfront District—(CRD). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the CRD zoning district are established in Table 2.3.3. 
Table 2.3.3.  Property Development Regulations: Central Riverfront Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the CRD zoning district is to provide a high density and intensity "main street" commercial center adjacent to the Chattahoochee River as a means to encourage a mixed use of residential, office, employment, institutional, and entertainment uses. 
C.  Intent. The CRD zoning district is intended to encourage and enhance the existing fabric of the City's historic urban area and to be applied in areas located adjacent to properties possessing one or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  Areas where high density and intensity development is encouraged; 
2.  Located adjacent to the Chattahoochee River; 
3.  Complement land uses that can attract employment, residential and entertainment activities in one extended area; and 
4.  Retain and enhance its reputation as an area possessing significant historic, cultural and institutional amenities. 
D.  Existing Encroachments. Existing encroachments into a public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.23. 
E.  Separation Distances for Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. Any minimum required separation distance between establishments selling alcoholic beverages for on-premises or off-premises consumption shall not apply within the CRD zoning district. 
F.  Additional Review. Properties within the CRD zoning district are subject to review by the Uptown Facade Board as provided in Section 9.2.5 and the BHAR as provided in Article 3 of Chapter 9. 
Section 2.3.4. - Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District—(NC). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the NC zoning district are established in Table 2.3.4. 
Table 2.3.4.  Property Development Regulations: Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the NC zoning district is to provide a low intensity commercial zoning district that caters to the day-to-day retail, commercial and personal services needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
C.  Intent. The NC zoning district is intended to be applied to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located near one or more residential neighborhoods; 
2.  Capable of serving a limited trade area; 
3.  Limited in size or square feet; and 
4.  Oriented toward both pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
D.  Maximum Size for Commercial, Retail and Office Establishments. 
1.  Maximum Size. Maximum size for a use shall not exceed 5,000 gross square feet. 
2.  (A)  Existing commercial, retail, and office establishments that are in excess of 5,000 gross square feet on March 1, 2005, shall be considered a conforming use. However, such uses shall not increase in number of existing square feet without obtaining a variance or rezoning to a district that allows an increased building size, unless such uses are located within a building that has been granted a special exception pursuant to Section 10.2.7.C of the UDO. 
(B)  Buildings in existence as of March 1, 2005, that have more than 5,000 square feet under roof may be granted a special exception pursuant to Section 10.2.7.C of the UDO to allow, at any time, one or more permitted uses within such buildings that each occupy more than 5,000 gross square feet under roof. 
3.  Permitted Increases in Sizes. The Director may permit an increase of not more than 10% in maximum building size based upon the standards listed below. 
(A)  Existing Building. The use is proposed to be located within an existing building that cannot be readily reduced in size to accommodate the activity. 
(B)  Business Practices. The additional size is necessary to accommodate specific business practices. 
(C)  Infill or Existing Development. The proposed use will utilize an existing building or structure in any zoning district, or will encourage infill development within the NC zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 10-37, § 1, 7-27-10) 
Section 2.3.5. - Residential Office Zoning District—(RO). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the RO zoning district are established in Table 2.3.5. 
Table 2.3.5.  Property Development Regulations: Residential Office Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the RO zoning district is to provide a lower density office and residential zoning district that may be utilized as a transitional buffer between more intense commercial zoning districts and less dense residential zoning districts. 
C.  Intent. The RO zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Suitable for transitional uses between more intense commercial districts and less dense residential districts; 
2.  Supportive of mixed residential and commercial uses; 
3.  Capable of supporting secondary uses that complement the residential and commercial components; and 
4.  Centers of related uses, such as medical, hospital, institutional and academic centers. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.3.6. - Commercial Office Zoning District—(CO). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the CO zoning district are established in Table 2.3.6. 
Table 2.3.6.  Property Development Regulations: Commercial Office Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the CO zoning district is to provide an area where office buildings and office parks are the predominant use and the district can be utilized as a transitional zoning district between more intense commercial districts and less intense residential zoning districts. 
C.  Intent. The CO zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located on major arterial or collector roads; 
2.  Located near major regional or state road systems, such as interstate highways; 
3.  Suitable in size to encourage a planned office campus that is planned and designed in a comprehensive manner; and 
4.  Capable of serving as a center for attracting and concentrating office, financial, service and similar types of uses. 
D.  Commercial Office Development Standards. Commercial office development shall comply with requirements applicable to an office park, as provided in Section 2.5.15.G. 
E.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
F.  Minimum Lot Size For Rezoning. Property minimum area for a site to be rezoned to the CO zoning district is three acres. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.3.7. - General Commercial Zoning District—(GC). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the GC zoning district are established in Table 2.3.7. 
Table 2.3.7.  Property Development Regulations: General Commercial Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the GC zoning district is to provide for a wide variety and intensity of commercial uses that may serve a citywide or regional market. 
C.  Intent. The GC zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located on major arterial or collector roads; 
2.  Located at or near intersections of arterial or collector roads with major regional or state road systems, such as interstate highways; 
3.  Suitable for attracting business over a multi-state and multicounty area; and 
4.  Of a size and nature to provide goods and services not needed on a regular basis, such as auto sales, appliances, discount department stores, and similar larger scale retail and commercial activities. 
Section 2.3.8. - Special Activity and Technical Center—Corporate Office Zoning District—(SAC). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. 
1.  Regulations. The property development regulations are listed in Table 2.3.8. 
Table 2.3.8.  Property Development Regulations for the SAC Zoning District 

 
2.  Conflicts. The requirements of this Section shall apply in the event of a conflict between this Section and the property development regulations of this Chapter. 
3.  Reduction. The requirement for minimum building square footage may be reduced upon the review and approval of the Director. General standards to consider such requests are indicated below. 
(A)  Lot Configuration. Lot configuration or dimensions that do not support compliance with minimum building size. 
(B)  Building Purpose. A building with a purpose that may not require compliance with minimum building size. 
(C)  Relation to Existing Structures. A building that is to be situated in such a manner that compliance with minimum requirements will result in a structure that is not consistent with scale and architectural context of existing buildings. 
(D)  Phasing. A building that is not consistent with minimum requirements in an initial phase, but will be consistent in a later phase. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the SAC zoning district is to provide one or more areas of downtown Columbus as an economic activity centers for the region. 
C.  Intent. The SAC zoning district is intended to be applied in downtown areas that can be utilized for: 
1.  Concentrated financial, security and insurance, data processing, telecommunication, computer/information technologies and other related office facilities servicing regional, state, national and international business; 
2.  Utilized for corporate, regional or local headquarters; 
3.  Efficient use of existing infrastructure, mass transit, governmental support services, and public/private investments allocated to downtown redevelopment and civic facilities; and 
4.  Strengthening the status of downtown Columbus by encouraging like uses of compatible size to locate in a district designed to foster the highest level of professional work environment. 
D.  Intent of Permitted Uses. Specific permitted and special exception uses within the SAC zoning district are provided in Chapter 3. The application of permitted uses is to be broadly interpreted to encourage the types of principal uses listed below. 
1.  Principal Uses Permitted with Administrative Approval. The uses listed below are permitted subject to administrative approval: 
(A)  Financial businesses; 
(B)  Security-insurance services; 
(C)  Data processing, including software development; and 
(D)  Telecommunication and other forms of media, excluding production. 
2.  Principal Use Permitted as a Special Exception Use. A hotel with an associated conference center containing at least 100,000 square feet of meeting rooms. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses and structures when related and incidental to a permitted use such as, but not limited to, food preparation and services, eating facilities, auditoriums, health and recreational facilities to serve employees. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
ARTICLE 4. - STANDARD INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 2.4.1. - Property Development Regulations. 
Consolidated property development regulations for industrial zoning districts are provided in Table 2.4.1. 
Table 2.4.1.  Consolidated Property Development Regulations: Industrial Zoning Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.4.2. - Technical Zoning District—(TECH). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the TECH zoning district are established in Table 2.4.2. 
Table 2.4.2.  Property Development Regulations: Technical Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the TECH zoning district is to provide an area where light manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities and office parks are the predominant use and the district can be utilized as a transitional zoning district between more intense industrial and manufacturing districts and less intense commercial or nonresidential zoning districts. 
C.  Intent. The TECH zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located on major arterial or collector roads; located near major regional or state road systems, such as interstate highways; 
2.  Located near other regional water or railroad transportation systems; 
3.  suitable in size to encourage a planned industrial campus that is planned and designed in a comprehensive manner; and 
4.  Capable of serving as a center for attracting and concentrating light manufacturing uses that are of economic benefit to the City. 
D.  Minimum Site Area. Minimum area for a site to be rezoned to a TECH zoning district is five acres. 
E.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
F.  Required Perimeter Buffers. Required perimeter buffers shall be provided as indicated in Table 2.4.3. 
Table 2.4.3.  Required Perimeter Buffers 

 
G.  Technology Park. A technology park shall comply with the standards of this Section. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of a technology park is to provide an area where light manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities and office parks are the predominant use and the district can be utilized as a transitional zoning district between more intense industrial and manufacturing districts and less intense commercial or nonresidential zoning districts. 
2.  Intent. The intent of a technology park is to be located in areas that are: 
(A)  Located on major arterial or collector roads; 
(B)  Located near major regional or state road systems, such as interstate highways; 
(C)  Located near other regional water or railroad transportation systems; 
(D)  Suitable in size to encourage a planned industrial campus that is planned and designed in a comprehensive manner; and 
(E)  Capable of serving as a center for attracting and concentrating light manufacturing uses that are of economic benefit to the City. 
3.  Minimum Site Area. Minimum site area for a technology park is five acres. 
4.  Secondary Uses for Retail and Personal Services. Secondary uses are permitted as provided in Section 4.2.9. 
5.  General Development Standards. A technology park will be developed consistent with the general development standards listed below. 
(A)  Master Plan. The park shall be developed in accordance with an overall master plan. In addition to information required by the City, the master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The general location of individual sites for future development; 
(2)  Maximum development, in square feet; 
(3)  General vehicular circulation pattern; 
(4)  Development restrictions, such as numbers of stories, maximum building size, and similar limits; 
(5)  Common areas, including buffer locations; 
(6)  Environmental preservation areas; and 
(7)  Such other items as may be required by City. 
(B)  Sign Plan. Signs within a technology park shall be installed consistent with an overall sign plan, as required by Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
(C)  Landscape Plan. 
(1)  Compliance. Landscaping within a technology park shall comply with the requirements of Article 5 of Chapter 4. 
(2)  Alternative Landscape Plan. The Director, upon a recommendation by the Tree Board, may allow use of an alternative landscape plan. A proposed alternative landscape plan may be allowed subject to the applicable standards listed below. 
(a)  Existing Vegetation. The proposed plan protects and utilizes significant amounts of existing vegetation, especially within required buffer areas. 
(b)  Vegetation Protection. The proposed plan provides for protection of large or unique areas of native vegetation within or on the perimeter of the proposed development. 
(c)  Creativity. The proposed plan provides a creative design that provides for an overall design theme or concept for the proposed development. 
(d)  Buffers. The proposed plan provides significant buffering, excess of the requirements of this Section, for adjacent residential zoning districts. 
(e)  Amount of Plant Material. The amount of required plant material, including trees, shrubs and ground cover, exceeds by ten percent the requirements of Article 5 of Chapter 4. 
(f)  Unique Features. The proposed plan provides unique landscape features such as significant entry areas, extensive landscaping along public roads and streets, and interior street tree plantings. 
(D)  Required Perimeter Buffers. Required perimeter buffers shall be provided as indicated in Table 2.4.4. 
Table 2.4.4.  Required Perimeter Buffers 

 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.4.3. - Light Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning District—(LMI). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the LMI zoning district are established in Table 2.4.5. 
Table 2.4.5.  Property Development Regulations: Light Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the LMI zoning district is to provide locations for light manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing uses. 
C.  Intent. The LMI zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located on arterial or collected streets; an existing land use pattern of less than one unit per acre; 
2.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  Located away from residential zoning districts; and 
4.  Provided with access to water and sewer services. 
D.  Accessory Retail Sales. Accessory retail sales of products are permitted, subject to the following: 
1.  The items for sale are produced onsite by the principal use; 
2.  The sales are accessory to the principal use; and 
3.  The sales activities shall occur within an enclosed building. 
Section 2.4.4. - Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning District—(HMI). 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations for the HMI zoning district are established in Table 2.4.6. 
Table 2.4.6.  Property Development Regulations: Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning District 

 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the HMI zoning district is to provide locations that are appropriate for locations for heavy manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing uses. 
C.  Intent. The HMI zoning district is intended to be applied in areas that are: 
1.  Located on arterial or collector streets; 
2.  Located at or near intersections of arterial or collector roads with major regional or state road systems, such as interstate highways; 
3.  Located near other regional water or railroad transportation systems; 
4.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
5.  Located away from residential zoning districts; and 
6.  Provided with access to water and sewer services. 
D.  Accessory Retail Sales. Accessory retail sales of products are permitted, subject to the following: 
1.  The items for sale are produced onsite by the principal use; 
2.  The sales are accessory to the principal use; and 
3.  The sales activities shall occur within an enclosed building. 
ARTICLE 5. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 2.5.1. - Overlay Zoning Districts. 
A.  Establishment. The Council may create one or more overlay zoning districts, including a specific area overlay district or a planned development overlay district. 
Section 2.5.2. - Specific Area Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of creating specific area overlay district (SAOD) is to allow the Council to address specific issues that may exist within a defined area, such as a roadway corridor or historic area, without the necessity for creating an entirely new zoning district or creating the need for one or more area-wide variances to achieve a desired community benefit. A SAOD allows the Council to address one or more issues such as: 
1.  Architectural or design control; 
2.  Building facades; 
3.  Community redevelopment; 
4.  Economic development 
5.  Historic resources; 
6.  Infill development; 
7.  Landscaping; 
8.  Natural resources protection or preservation; 
9.  Signage; 
10.  Specific use regulations; and 
11.  Tree and vegetation preservation. 
Section 2.5.3. - SAOD Creation and Application. 
A SAOD shall be created and applied as indicated below. 
A.  Creation. A SAOD shall be adopted in the same manner as a standard zoning district. 
B.  Application. A SAOD shall be applied to a specific area of the City. The specific boundaries of a SAOD shall be created by the implementing ordinance and shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 
C.  Regulations and Incentives. The regulations, incentives and other land development regulations applicable within a SAOD shall be included in the ordinance creating the district. 
D.  Inclusion in Unified Development Code. All overlay zoning districts that are created shall be included in this unified development code. 
E.  Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between the regulations associated with a SAOD and the regulations of the underlying zoning district, the requirements of the overlay district shall apply. Unless otherwise addressed in the ordinance approving a SAOD, the requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply. 
Section 2.5.4. - Master Planned Development Overlay Districts. 
The master planned development overlay districts (MPDs) created in this Article are provided as an alternative to a standard zoning district. For the purpose of this Article, the following MPDs are created: 
A.  Planned Residential Unit Development (PUD); 
B.  Planned Commercial Development (PCD); 
C.  Planned Industrial/Manufacturing Development (PID); and 
D.  Planned Mixed Use Development (PMUD). 
Section 2.5.5. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of an MPD is to provide a variety of benefits to the City, adjacent residents and communities, and the property owner, as indicated below. 
A.  Comprehensive Plan. To encourage development or redevelopment that is consistent with the City's comprehensive plan. 
B.  Compatibility. To encourage development or redevelopment that is compatible with the character, density or intensity of adjacent uses. 
C.  Creative Development. To encourage development or redevelopment patterns that achieve a more efficient and creative development or redevelopment of property. 
D.  Efficiency. To encourage an economical and efficient arrangement of buildings. 
E.  Innovation. To provide maximum opportunity for application of innovative concepts of development or redevelopment in the creation of aesthetically pleasing living, shopping and working environments on properties of adequate size, shape and location. 
F.  Preservation. To preserve the natural amenities and environmental assets of the land by encouraging the preservation and improvement of scenic and functional open areas 
G.  Design. To provide architectural and design features which are aesthetically pleasing and supportive of an enhanced quality of life and are reflective of area or community character. 
H.  Public Services. To make use of existing public services, including water, sewer, drainage, roads and schools, or to assist the City with reconstruction, expansion or installation of required public services. 
I.  Public Benefits. To provide one or more specifically identifiable benefits to the City and its residents, including voluntary dedication of land for public purposes, preservation of natural or cultural resource, elimination of blight, or provide affordable housing. 
J.  Flexibility and Balance. The MPD is a flexible overlay zoning district that is intended to provide an appropriate balance between the density or intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate services for such development. 
K.  Approved Development. To ensure that development occurs according to limitations of use, design, density, coverage, and planning as stipulated in an approved development plan approved by the Council. 
Section 2.5.6. - Review of Master Planned Districts. 
Review and consideration for approval of application for a master planned development, including a conceptual master plan, shall include the following: 
A.  General consistency with the purpose and intent of the overlay zoning district as indicated in Section 2.5.2; 
B.  Overall consistency with comprehensive plan; 
C.  Overall consistency with UDO; 
D.  Overall consistency with historic district designations, overlay zoning districts or similar designations; 
E.  Overall compatibility with existing or anticipated surrounding uses; 
F.  Anticipated impacts on community facilities, including water, sewer, drainage, public schools and roads; 
G.  Anticipated positive and negative economic impacts; 
H.  Anticipated impact on environmental and natural resources; 
I.  Anticipated neighborhood or community impacts; and 
J.  Anticipated screening and buffering to be provided. 
Section 2.5.7. - Conceptual Master Plan Required for MPD Application. 
An application for MPD overlay zoning shall comply with the requirements of Article 2 of Chapter 10. In addition to these requirements, a conceptual master plan for the entire MPD shall be submitted with an application for MPD approval. The conceptual master plan shall contain such information as indicated in Table 2.5.1 and as may be required by the Department. 
A.  Approval. The conceptual master plan shall be included as part of any planned development approval granted by the Council. A conceptual master plan shall contain, at a minimum, the information listed in Table 2.5.1. 
Table 2.5.1.  Conceptual Master Plan Information 

 
B.  Deviation or Amendments. Any deviation from or amendment proposed to an approved conceptual master plan shall be reviewed as provided below. 
C.  Major Amendments. Major amendments to an approved conceptual plan to approved conceptual master plans shall be reviewed by the Council. An amendment is deemed to be a major amendment if such amendment provides for: 
1.  An increase in land area of more than 5 percent or 2 acres whichever is less; 
2.  An increase of more than 5 percent of total nonresidential square feet of building area, including retail, commercial, office or industrial uses; 
3.  Any increase in the number of approved dwelling units; 
4.  Any change in the approved mix of residential dwelling unit types which results in an increase or decrease of a specific unit type of more than 5 percent; 
5.  Any changes to an approved development phasing plan; 
6.  Any changes to a condition of development approval; 
7.  Any reduction in excess of 5 percent of open space, common area, conservation area, environmental area preserve, or similar area intended as open space; 
8.  Any change in phasing that extends anticipated time of development by more than 12 months; 
9.  Any reduction of more than 5 percent of an approved perimeter, screening or other landscape or manmade buffer; 
10.  Any amendment that would substantially alter the character of an approved development; 
11.  Any amendment which would materially decrease the amount or size of recreational, open space or similar amenities in a residential or nonresidential development; 
12.  Any major change to principal vehicular or pedestrian circulation; 
13.  Any change to an approved plan when considered cumulatively with prior minor amendments which, as determined by the Director, results in a substantial deviation from an approval granted by the Council; or 
14.  Any change that the Director determines to deviate materially from the approval granted by the Council. 
D.  Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to an approved conceptual plan to approved conceptual master plans shall be reviewed by the staff. An amendment is deemed to be a minor amendment if it is not a major amendment. 
E.  Implementation of Approved Conceptual Master Plan. Each phase, parcel, subdivision, tract or similar discrete land area within a conceptual master plan shall be implemented by individual site plans. Site plans are subject to review and approval by the City staff as provided in Article 3 of Chapter 10. 
Section 2.5.8. - Property Development Regulations and Permitted Uses. 
Property development regulations and permitted uses within a MPD are established in this Section. 
A.  Property Development Regulations. Unless otherwise provided in a planned development approval, the property development regulations within a MPD are established by the regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses. Unless otherwise provided in a planned development approval, the permitted and special exception uses within a MPD are established by the regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district. 
C.  Approved Planned Developments. In addition to creating a MPD overlay district, the approval for a planned development may address one or more of the following: 
1.  Permitted, special exception and prohibited uses; 
2.  Property development regulations; and 
3.  Waivers to requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
D.  Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between the planned development approval and the property development regulations or permitted uses of the underlying zoning district, the provisions of the planned development approval shall prevail. 
Section 2.5.9. - Minimum Standards. 
All MPD shall comply with the minimum standards of Table 2.5.2. 
Table 2.5.2.  Minimum Master Planned Development Standards 

 
Section 2.5.10. - General Standards. 
All MPDs shall comply with the standards of this Section. 
A.  Underground Utilities. All utilities, excluding necessary service boxes and similar installations, shall be located underground. This requirement shall not apply to electrical transmission or major distribution lines located along the perimeter of a MPD. The Council shall not waive this requirement. 
B.  Variances. Unless otherwise provided by this unified development code, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance within a MPD. Any requested deviation from a property development regulation as provided in Chapter 2 or a development standard for a particular use as provided in Chapter 3, shall be considered as a waiver. 
C.  Platting. All areas of a subdivision, including all common areas, shall be platted. 
D.  Phasing. Phasing of development is permitted, subject to approval by the Council. 
Section 2.5.11. - Open Space. 
Open space within a planned development shall be calculated as provided below. 
A.  Planned Unit Development. Open space within a PUD shall include the following: active and passive recreation areas; active and passive recreation areas; areas dedicated for a public purpose; buffers and areas associated with floodplain management; community areas such as clubhouses; conservation or preservation areas; perimeter buffer areas; streets and roads; water control and drainage features; and yard and landscaping areas associated with individual dwellings and buildings. 
B.  Planned Commercial and Industrial Developments. Open space within a PCD or PID shall include the following: areas dedicated for a public purpose; buffers and areas associated with floodplain management; conservation or preservation areas; perimeter buffer areas; and water control and drainage features. 
C.  Mixed Use Developments. Open space within a PMUD shall include the following: active and passive recreation areas; areas dedicated for a public purpose; buffers and areas associated with floodplain management; conservation or preservation areas; perimeter buffer areas; and water control and drainage features. 
Section 2.5.12. - Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the PUD overlay zoning district is to: 
1.  Provide residential development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  Provide residential development that is compatible with and enhances surrounding land use patterns; 
3.  Allow a departure from strict adherence to property development, use and similar requirements applicable to a standard zoning district; 
4.  Provide residential development that allows for creative and innovative design; 
5.  Provide residential development that provides a variety of circulation patterns; 
6.  Provide residential development that supports and encourages the use of cluster development techniques; 
7.  Provide buffering and landscaping in excess of current requirements; 
8.  Encourage infill residential development; 
9.  Provide residential development in a manner that conserves natural and environment resources; 
10.  Provide residential development that creates large areas of open spaces for common use and enjoyment; 
11.  Provide for community-serving commercial development; and 
12.  Encourage voluntary dedication of land or other benefits to the public and City. 
B.  Required Rezoning. 
1.  Rezoning Required . Any residential development that exceeds either the minimum site size or number of dwelling units as indicated in Table 2.5.2 shall be considered a PUD and shall be required to be rezoned to a PUD overlay zoning district. 
2.  Reserved. 
C.  Permitted Housing Types. All types of residential dwellings, excluding mobile homes, may be permitted within a PUD. 
D.  Commercial Centers. As part of a PUD approval, the Council may approve a neighborhood commercial center or a community commercial center, subject to the criteria and standards provided in this Section. A neighborhood or community commercial center within a PUD may be allowed, subject to the standards listed below. 
1.  Neighborhood Commercial Centers. 
(A)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of neighborhood commercial centers within a PUD is to provide neighborhood commercial, retail and personal services to the residents, without the necessity of traveling outside the boundaries of the community. 
(B)  Limit. Not more than ten percent of the gross land area of a PUD may be developed for neighborhood-serving commercial or office uses. This area may be increased, to a maximum of an additional ten percent, on the basis of one percent for each acre dedicated without charge for a public purpose such as a right-of-way, public school or park. 
(C)  Permitted Uses. Uses in neighborhood commercial center shall be same as the permitted or special exception uses in the NC zoning district, as may be modified by a planned development approval. 
(D)  Locational Standards. Neighborhood commercial centers shall be constructed in one or more locations that optimize availability to PUD residents. Neighborhood commercial centers shall be designated on the PUD master plan. The location of a commercial center is subject to the overall standards listed below. 
(1)  PUD-Serving. The size, intensity, and proposed uses within the proposed neighborhood commercial center are appropriate as PUD-serving uses, and are not of a nature requiring a larger market area. 
(2)  Civic Uses. The proposed neighborhood commercial center may contain civic uses of a PUD-serving nature, including postal services, meeting facilities, recreation facilities, and administrative offices. 
(3)  Access. The neighborhood commercial center will not be accessible from any public or private roads abutting the PUD. 
(4)  Central Area. The proposed neighborhood commercial center will be generally located at the center of a project. If multiple neighborhood centers are provided, the location shall be central to a phase or identifiable portion of the PUD. 
(5)  Visibility. The proposed neighborhood commercial center will not be visible from any public roads abutting the PUD. 
(6)  Intersection Location. The proposed neighborhood commercial center will be located at the intersection of two or more neighborhood collector or neighborhood-serving roads. 
(7)  Advertising. The proposed neighborhood commercial development site will not be advertised in any fashion on abutting public roads. 
(E)  Waivers. Waivers to PUD standards may be granted as provided in Section 2.5.18. 
2.  Community Commercial Centers. 
(A)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of community commercial centers approved in association with a PUD is to provide commercial, retail and personal services to the residents, without the necessity of traveling outside the boundaries of the community. 
(B)  Maximum Size Limit. 
(1)  Maximum Land Area. The lesser of 15 acres or ten percent of the gross land area of a PUD may be developed for community-serving commercial or office uses, subject to the limitations listed below. 
(a)  This area may be increased, to a maximum of an additional ten percent, on the basis of one percent for each acre dedicated without charge for a public purpose such as a right-of-way, public school or park. 
(b)  The gross land area of the residential portion of the PUD must be at least five times as large as the gross land area of the PUD that is used for community commercial purposes. 
(2)  Maximum Number of Square Feet. A community-serving shopping center shall not exceed 150,000 square feet, unless a specific waiver to exceed that limit is approved by the Council as provided in Section 2.5.18. 
(C)  Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
(1)  Permitted Uses. Uses in community commercial center shall be same as the permitted or special exception uses in the NC zoning district, as may be modified by the Council as part of a PUD approval. 
(2)  Mix of Users. A mix of retail, office and personal services shall be located within a community commercial center. Each center shall provide at least three separate users or tenants. 
(3)  Prohibited Uses. Regional, "big box," and similar types of uses that attract clientele from within and outside the community are prohibited. 
(4)  Maximum Size of Permitted Uses. Individual uses shall not exceed a maximum of 5,000 gross square feet. This limit may be waived by the Council, for specific community-serving uses such as grocery stores, drug stores and similar types of uses providing goods and services of a daily or routine nature. 
(D)  Locational Standards. Community commercial centers shall be constructed with principal frontage along either arterial or collector roads. 
(E)  Compatibility. Community commercial centers shall be designed, constructed and operated to minimize impacts on all surrounding properties, including all street frontages. Factors to be addressed during the development review process include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Buffering; 
(2)  Landscaping; 
(3)  Lighting; 
(4)  Hours of operation; 
(5)  Location of garbage, refuse, recycling and similar collection facilities; 
(6)  Architectural features; 
(7)  Stormwater and drainage; and 
(8)  Types of uses that are community-serving. 
(F)  Conceptual Master Plan Designation. PUD community commercial centers shall be designated on the PUD conceptual master plan. 
(G)  Civic Uses. The proposed commercial center may contain civic uses of a community-serving nature, including postal services, meeting facilities, recreation facilities, and administrative offices. 
(H)  Waivers. Waivers to PUD standards may be granted as provided in Section 2.5.18. 
(Ord. No. 14-19, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Section 2.5.13. - PUD Incentives. 
As indicated in Table 2.5.3, additional density is provided as an incentive to utilize the PUD zoning district. The amount of additional density to be provided shall be determined based upon compliance with the purpose and intent of this Article and this Section. 
Table 2.5.3.  PUD Density Incentives (Units per Acre) 

 
A.  Incentive Standards. The Council, when reviewing a request for additional dwelling units within a PUD, shall utilize the standards provided below. 
1.  Comprehensive Plan. The request is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Unified Development Ordinance. The request in consistent with the requirements of this unified development ordinance. 
3.  Public Benefit. The application provides one or more clear benefits to the public, including the following: 
(A)  Creation of green space or open space in excess of requirements of this code; 
(B)  Dedication at no charge or reduced charge of land for public purpose, including right-of-way in excess of area required for the abutting roadway, public school sites, public parks, land trusts, or similar public purpose; 
(C)  Preservation of significant environmental resources such as historic resources, archeological resources, wetlands, environmental resources, and similar areas; 
(D)  Construction of significant public improvements in excess of normal requirements, including sidewalks, roadways to alleviate traffic congestion, or extension of water or sewer lines; 
(E)  Elimination of existing area problems such as insufficient drainage, lack of internal and external roadway connectivity to adjacent residential zoning districts and existing or proposed residential development; 
(F)  Installation or retention of significant perimeter buffering to protect adjacent residential properties or to protect future residents from adjacent nonresidential uses; and 
(G)  Creation of mixed use projects that provide an appropriate mix of residential, commercial, employment and related activities. 
4.  Compatibility. The project is compatible with all adjacent properties relating to one or more of the following: architectural style and design, site development characteristics, bulk, height, anticipated uses, lot size, traffic impact, and water and sewer demand. 
5.  Connectivity. The project provides an appropriate degree of connectivity to adjacent public roadways, including connection to existing or future roadways and connection to existing or future public improvements such as drainage, potable water and central sewer services. 
6.  Infill Development. The project utilizes property within existing urban areas that have remained undeveloped, have been developed or are subject to redevelopment. 
Section 2.5.14. - Planned Commercial Development—(PCD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the PCD overlay zoning district is to: 
1.  Provide commercial development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  Provide commercial development that is compatible with and enhances surrounding land use patterns; 
3.  Allow a departure from strict adherence to property development, use and similar requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district; 
4.  Provide commercial development that allows for creative and innovative design; 
5.  Provide commercial development that encourages the use of alternative design patterns that support a pedestrian orientation, 
6.  Provide buffering and landscaping in excess of current requirements; 
7.  Encourage infill commercial and residential development; 
8.  Provide residential development in a manner that is consistent with the overall intent of the planned development; 
9.  Provide residential development that creates large areas of open spaces for common use and enjoyment; and 
10.  Encourage voluntary deduction of land or other benefits to the public and City. 
B.  Property Development Regulations. Permitted and special exception uses are established by either the underlying zoning district or the planned development approval granted by the Council, as appropriate. 
C.  Incentives. 
1.  Residential Density Incentive. As indicated in Table 2.5.4, residential density is provided as an incentive to utilize the PCD zoning district. The amount of additional intensity or density to be provided shall be determined based upon compliance with the purpose and intent of both this Article and this Section. 
2.  Maximum Density. Maximum residential density within a PCD shall be determined by the difference between the total number of nonresidential gross square feet that may be constructed and the actual amount of nonresidential gross square feet that is constructed. That difference, expressed as a percentage, is applied against the maximum density allowed in a planned development. In a PCD, the calculation of density shall be 16.5 units per acre. An example of this calculation is presented in Table 2.5.4. 
Table 2.5.4.  Residential Density Incentive Calculations 

 
D.  Permitted Housing Types. All types of residential dwellings, excluding mobile homes, may be permitted within a PCD. 
E.  Waivers. Waivers to applicable nonresidential or residential standards may be granted as provided in Section 2.5.18. 
F.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses. Permitted and special exception uses are established by either the underlying zoning district or a planned development approval, as appropriate. 
G.  Office Park. 
1.  Purpose. Standards for development of an office park have been included for the purpose of: 
(A)  Encouraging and facilitating a more total approach to land development; and 
(B)  Encouraging the conservation of natural and fiscal resources of both the private and public sectors. 
2.  Definitions. Definitions relating to offices parks are provided in Chapter 13. 
3.  General Standards. An office park shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(A)  Lot Area. Comply with the minimum lot area and other property development regulations of this Article. In addition, the standards listed below shall apply. 
(1)  Setbacks. The setback requirements shall be included as part of the common areas. Setbacks shall not be required for individual parcels within the development. 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area shall not be required per lessee or owner of a parcel within the office park. 
(3)  Minimum Frontage. Possess frontage of at least 25 feet on a public right-of-way. All requirements for frontage on a public right-of-way shall apply to the boundaries of the entire development and not to individually owned parcels. 
(B)  Water and Sewer. The park shall be served by public water and sewage systems. 
(C)  Common Areas. An agreement for the installation and maintenance of common area features, including utilities, drainage and roads, shall be provided. 
4.  Site Plan Review. As provided in Article 3 of Chapter 10, all parcels within an office park shall be subject to site plan review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
5.  Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until construction is deemed to be in full compliance with the approved site plan. 
Section 2.5.15. - Planned Industrial/Manufacturing Development—(PID). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the PID zoning district is to: 
1.  Provide manufacturing and industrial development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  Provide manufacturing and industrial development that is compatible with and enhances surrounding land use patterns; 
3.  Allow a departure from strict adherence to property development, use and similar requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district; 
4.  Provide manufacturing and industrial development that allows for creative and innovative design; 
5.  Provide buffering and landscaping in excess of current requirements; 
6.  Encourage infill manufacturing and industrial development; 
7.  Provide residential development in a manner that is consistent with the overall purpose of the planned development; 
8.  Provide residential development that creates large areas of open spaces for common use and enjoyment; 
9.  Encourage voluntary dedication of land or other benefits to the public and City. 
B.  Property Development Regulations. Permitted and special exception uses are established by either the underlying zoning district or a planned development approval, as appropriate. 
C.  Waivers. Waivers to applicable nonresidential or residential standards may be granted as provided in Section 2.5.18. 
D.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses. Permitted and special exception uses are established by either the underlying zoning district or a planned development approval, as appropriate. 
E.  Maximum Density. Residential density within a PID zoning district shall comply with the standards of Section 2.5.14, as provided for planned commercial developments. 
F.  Permitted Housing Types. All types of residential dwellings, excluding mobile homes, may be permitted within a PID. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Section 2.5.16. - Planned Mixed Use Development—(PMUD). 
A.  Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Designation. The proposed site shall possess a commercial or industrial future land use and zoning designation. 
B.  Land Uses. 
1.  Minimum Number of Uses. Mixed use developments shall include a minimum of three types of land uses including but not limited to the following: academic and institutional, residential, retail and personal services, hotel and motel, industrial or manufacturing. Different types of residential structures shall not be regarded as a different type of use. 
2.  Maximum Use Percentage. A single use shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the proposed site. 
3.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses. Permitted and special exception uses shall be established by the development approval for the planned development. 
C.  Design and Planning. A mixed used development shall be planned for a diversification of uses, structures, and open spaces in a manner compatible with surrounding land uses and development patterns. 
D.  Property Development Regulations. Property development regulations are established by either the underlying zoning district or a planned development approval, as appropriate. 
E.  Incentives. As indicated in Table 2.5.4, additional density is provided as an incentive to utilize the mixed use provisions for planned developments. The amount of additional intensity or density to be provided shall be determined based upon compliance with the purpose and intent of both this Article and this Section. 
F.  Internal Circulation. A mixed use development shall provide vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation and accessibility for all uses within the site. 
Section 2.5.17. - Waivers to MPD Requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Section are to encourage applicants for MPD approval to propose residential and nonresidential projects that are innovative, creative and utilize planning, design, and architectural concepts that will be of benefit to the City. The use of innovative and creative techniques and concepts may require one or more waivers to the development standards applicable to such projects. The Council may grant one or more of the requested waivers, provided community benefits are demonstrated, such as: 
(A)  Architectural design; 
(B)  Pedestrian amenities; 
(C)  Preservation of environmentally sensitive lands; 
(D)  Provision of public parks and open space; or 
(E)  Provision of mixed uses that reduce impacts on City services. 
2.  Waivers Permitted. An application for MPD approval may include a request for waiver of one or more requirements of this Article. Requests for waivers shall comply with the requirements contained herein. For the purpose of this Section, a waiver is defined as a reduction in a development standard or other land development regulation that is normally required. 
3.  Prohibited Waivers. The Council shall not grant the waivers listed below. 
(A)  A waiver of a standard established by federal or state law; 
(B)  A waiver of a standard or requirement affecting the public safety; 
(C)  A waiver of a standard affecting drainage, water quality, water or sewer service; or 
(D)  A waiver of a standard affecting traffic safety. 
4.  Grant of Waivers. The Council, following an advisory recommendation by the Planning Division and Planning Advisory Commission, may grant waivers from requirements applicable to planned developments. 
5.  Waivers Established. For the purposes of this Section, the Council may grant waivers as indicated in Table 2.5.5. 
Table 2.5.5.  Planned Developments Waivers 

 
B.  Residential Variances. 
1.  Reduction. Any reduction to a planned development standard or requirement applicable to an entire residential use or project shall occur only as provided in this Section. 
2.  Exception. The owner of a single-family dwelling may apply for a variance to the applicable development standards, rather than apply for a waiver. 
C.  Application. 
1.  Request for Waiver. All requests for a waiver shall be submitted accompany an application for planned development approval. Each waiver to planned development requirements or standards utilized in an application shall be identified by the applicant. 
2.  Criteria. A request for the Council to approve a waiver generally shall comply the criteria listed below. 
(A)  Comprehensive Plan. The request is consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  Purpose and Intent. The request is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Section. 
(C)  Design Benefits. The request furthers the public and City benefits such as development possessing architectural significance, pedestrian amenities and linkages, employment opportunities, reductions in vehicle trips and a enhancing the traditional character of the City. 
(D)  Enhancement of Natural Resources. The request demonstrates that granting of a waiver will result in preservation of valuable natural resources, including environmentally sensitive lands, drainage areas, floodplains, water-related resources and similar areas of environmental significance. 
(E)  Public and City Benefits. The request clearly demonstrates public benefits to be derived, including but not limited to such benefits as no-cost dedication of rights-of-way, voluntary dedication at no-cost of lands for public purposes, extensions of pedestrian linkages outside of the project boundaries and use of desirable architectural, building, and site design techniques. 
(F)  Screening and Buffering. Sufficient screening and buffering, if required, is provided to screen adjacent uses from adverse impacts caused by a waiver. 
(G)  Economics. The request is not based solely or predominantly on economic reasons. 
(H)  Compatibility. The request will be compatible with existing and potential land uses adjacent to the development site. 
(I)  Minimum Requirements. The request demonstrates that granting of the waiver will result in a development that exceeds one or more of the minimum requirements for planned developments. 
(J)  Innovative Design. The request for one or more waivers results from innovative design in which other minimum standards are exceeded. 
Section 2.5.18. - Mill Restoration Overlay District—(MROD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of creating a Mill Restoration Overlay District (MROD) is to allow the Council to address specific issues that may exist with vacant mills without the necessity for creating an entirely new zoning district or creating the need for one or more variances to achieve a desired community benefit. A MROD allows the Council to address the following issues concerning mill restoration: 
1.  Architectural or Design Issues. Architectural or design issues shall be addressed individually concerning each mill. 
2.  Building Facades. Building facades shall be addressed individually concerning each mill. 
3.  Economic Development. Economic development criteria: 
(A)  Job creation. 
(B)  Neighborhood revitalization. 
(C)  Taxation impact. 
(D)  New land-use designations. 
4.  Historic Resources. Historic resources shall be assessed by the Lower Chattahoochee Regional Development Commission's Historic Preservation Planner. 
5.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be addressed in accordance with Article 5 of Chapter 4. 
6.  Natural Resources Protection and Preservation. Natural resources protection and preservation shall be addressed individually concerning each mill. 
7.  Signage. No portable sign or billboards shall be permitted in the MROD. All signage requirements shall be addressed in accordance with Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
8.  Tree and Vegetation Preservation. Tree and vegetation preservation shall be addressed in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Chapter 4. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Residential. 
(A)  Dwelling, Multi-Family. 
(B)  Dwelling, Condominium. 
2.  Civic and Public. 
(A)  Cultural Facility. 
(B)  Public Uses. 
([C])  University or college. 
3.  Commercial and Personal Services. 
(A)  Artisans. 
(B)  Arts and Crafts sales. 
(C)  Banks and Financial institutions. 
(D)  Banquet Facility. 
(E)  Bars and Lounges. 
(F)  Clinic, Medical or Dental. 
(G)  Consignment Shop. 
(H)  Convalescent or Nursing Facility. 
(I)  Convenience Store, No Gas Sales. 
(J)  Data Processing. 
(K)  Day Care Center, Type II. 
(L)  Day Care Center, Type III. 
(M)  Dry Cleaning and Laundry Station. 
(N)  Film and Video Studio. 
(O)  Gift and Antique Shop. 
(P)  Health and Fitness Facility. 
(Q)  Hotel, Motel, or Inn. 
(R)  Massage Therapy. 
(S)  Office, Business and Professional. 
(T)  Office, Medical or Dental. 
(U)  Outdoor Café, Private Property. 
(V)  Personal Services. 
(W)  Pharmacy or Drug Store. 
(X)  Recreational establishment 
(Y)  Restaurant, General. 
(Z)  Retail Sales, General. 
(AA)  Schools, Vocational and Non-academic. 
4.  Manufacturing and Industrial. 
(A)  Self Service Storage. 
(B)  Warehousing. 
5.  Accessory and Temporary Uses. 
(A)  Accessory Uses. 
(B)  Temporary Use or Special Event. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 14-65, § 1, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 15-55, § 1, 11-17-15) 
Section 2.5.19. - U.S. Highway 80 Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purposes of this section are to: 
1.  Improve and enhance the aesthetic qualities of development within the arterial road corridor of U.S. Highway 80 through the implementation of land use regulations, and within which amenity features are encouraged. 
2.  Manage the location and intensity of development within the arterial road corridor and to concentrate development in focus areas. 
3.  Ensure safe access by vehicles and pedestrians to destinations in the corridor in a manner that does not conflict with access to individual developments or the roadway's primary purpose. 
4.  Encourage the minimization of visual clutter along the city's major roadways. 
5.  Provide a quality and sustainable living environment for the citizens of Columbus. 
6.  Create effective transitions between different uses, by planting trees, shrubs, groundcover and other landscaping material in open space areas. 
7.  Add a valuable amenity to the urban environment by providing shade, cooling the air through evaporation, restoring oxygen to the atmosphere, reducing glare and noise levels, and providing an ecological habitat for song birds and other animal and plant species. 
8.  Exercise greater control over the aesthetic and functional characteristics of development along major thoroughfares and roadways that serve as major entrances to the community, where higher development standards can effectively enhance the city's image as a desirable place to live, work and shop. 
B.  Definitions. 
Amenity : Pedestrian shelters, gazebos, decorative paving, pathways and sidewalks, trees, landscaping, retention ponds when designed according to the specifications of this ordinance, signage when scaled to the pedestrian and constructed of materials and sizes specified in this ordinance and other aesthetic features and characteristics approved by the city. 
Corridor : All lands that are undeveloped and/or any developed lands that are redeveloped on the date of adoption of this ordinance which are located wholly or partially within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 80 (from Warm Springs Road, east to the Talbot county line) with a 1,000-foot depth at each intersection, or as shown on the official zoning, land use, or corridor maps. 
Focus Areas : An area of land within the corridor, at the intersection of the corridor and any other intersecting public road. Unless more specifically shown on the corridor overlay map, a focus area shall be generally limited to a square parcel of land extending 1,000 feet from the intersection to which it pertains, in both directions along the road rights-of-way. The focus area includes approximately twenty-three acres at each quadrant and can be larger or smaller by mutual agreement of the city and other interested parties. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This ordinance shall apply to all properties lying wholly or partially within the U.S. Highway 80 Corridor as shown on the Official Zoning Map and the Overlay District Map, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. No clearing or other disturbance of land shall occur, and no building, structure or use shall be established, except in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  These standards shall apply to all redevelopment activities. Redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site. 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square footage of building's or a site's physical development by 50 percent or greater, from the date of the ordinance inception. 
D.  Encouraged Uses. Mixed uses such as commercial, civic spaces, institutional uses and residences (including residential use in the same building with commercial), and office or other uses, are especially encouraged within focus areas. 
E.  Design Requirements/Access. 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure. 
(A)  Vehicular Access to Site. Within the corridor, the subdivision of lots along an arterial road shall not be allowed if designed so that each lot has its own individual access to the major road unless approved by the Director of Engineering. Each pod of development, or if subdivided, each lot (including out parcels), must be connected with on-site access to a frontage road or interconnecting driveway, rather than directly to the arterial road. 
(B)  Private Roadway/Driveways. All private access to U.S. Highway 80 shall be right-in/right-out and at intervals no closer than 300 feet as measured from the center-of-access to center-of-access roadway/driveways. Two-way access may be allowed at existing median breaks or at new median breaks at intervals of 1,320 feet only with the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Director of Engineering for the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(C)  Interparcel Access. All land parcels, excluding single-family residential, fronting the Corridor right-of-way shall have interparcel connectivity via either a frontage road or a travel way that is delineated from parking areas such that short trips between developments can be made without use of the major road within the Corridor. Within a focus area, development shall interconnect with the road or travel way network of any adjacent development or site within the focus area unless the Director of Engineering determines such connection would constitute an undue hardship. 
(D)  Medians. Private roads and entrances to developments connecting with the arterial road in the Corridor or serving development in a focus area shall include center medians. Such roadway designs will be based upon projected traffic volume and the number of parking spaces. Medians are desired because they improve traffic safety and can be planted to enhance the overall appearance of the focus area, as well as provide refuge for pedestrians. 
(E)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required as established under Chapter 7, Article 10 of the Unified Development Ordinance and shall be adjacent to all nonlimited access public rights-of-way. 
(F)  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access should be provided to individual developments from any sidewalk, unless topography prohibits construction of facilities meeting Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Where medians are required, pedestrian access shall be provided across the median as approved by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Retail Developments. For retail developments totaling 200,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area, or uses that result in a building of 100,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area whether by new construction or by expansion of existing uses, such developments shall comply with the retail developments of community significance section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
3.  Utility Location. All new utility lines serving a development constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located underground. 
4.  Landscaping Requirements. 
(A)  General. All developments shall be landscaped, screened, and buffered in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Chapter 4 of the Unified Development Ordinance. In addition to these requirements, 20-tree density unit per acre for all nonresidential development shall be required. 
(B)  A minimum 15-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to all road rights-of-way in developments, with the exception of RE10, RE5, RE1, RT, SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, and SFR4 developments. Parking, merchandise displays, and off-street loading are prohibited in the landscaped strip. 
(C)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided between primary developments and adjacent out parcels in accordance with Section 4.5.8 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(D)  A minimum of one large-maturing tree per 40 linear feet of frontage shall be planted in the 15-foot wide landscaped strip as required above. Clustering of trees may be permitted if approved by the City Arborist. 
(E)  Trash areas shall be located at a minimum of 100 feet from any public road right-of-way. 
5.  Parking/Yard, Height and Setback. 
(A)  Location of Parking Areas. Buildings should be located at the corner of sites closest to the road intersection, so that the parking areas are screened by the building from view of any public road, and so that the travel path from public sidewalks is shortened. Parking must be located in a way that is not visually dominant. Parking between buildings and an arterial road is discouraged, but if necessary, requirements of section 2.5.19.E.5.(C) (Screening of parking areas) must be met. If parking is located in the side or rear yards, any screening may be clustered and need not cover 100 percent of frontage. 
(B)  Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width, or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight feet in width and 17 feet in depth. 
(C)  All nonresidential developments shall meet at least one of the following requirements: 
(1)    

 
(2)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principal building), a minimum 18-inch evergreen hedge shall be installed to obscure visibility of the parking lot from the corridor. This evergreen hedge must reach a minimum height of two and one-half feet within two years of planting. Screening may be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(3)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principle building), a combination of landscaped earthen berm and evergreen hedge with a minimum height of 18 inches shall be used. The total height of landscaped earthen berm and hedge combination shall reach a minimum height of two and one-half feet at planting. Screening shall be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(D)  Reserved. 
6.  Signage. 
(A)  Billboards. Billboards and bench signs shall not be permitted in the Corridor. 
(B)  Monument Signs. Freestanding signs shall be monument style. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. Signs for single businesses shall not exceed 36 square feet in size and a height of six feet. Joint identification signs for multiple businesses at one location may have a monument sign not to exceed 64 square feet in size and a height of eight feet. Marketing, spectacular, inflatable/flying, bench, roof, and mobile/portable signs and street banners, as defined in Sections 4.4.5 of the Unified Development Ordinance are not allowed. Canopy and awning sign(s) shall be limited to 15 square feet per road frontage, and if lighted, the lettering shall be individually formed and lighted. 
F.  Building Placement, Height and Intensity. 
1.  Placement Generally. Buildings should be arranged so that they help frame and define the fronting arterial road or driveways (i.e., the arterial road in the Corridor, an intersecting arterial road, or internal streets or driveways of the development), thus giving deliberate form to streets and sidewalk areas. 
2.  Building Height. Buildings located on property abutting a residential zoned area must be comparable in height to those in the residential area. 
3.  Building Mass, Intensity and Density. Mass of buildings and building intensity (floor area ratios) should be highest when located closest to the arterial road intersection, transitioning to progressively lower intensities moving outwards to the outer edge of the focus area. Buildings at the outer edge of the focus area should be comparable in mass and intensity with the surrounding neighborhood or existing land uses adjacent and beyond the focus area. 
G.  Provisions for Specific Uses. 
1.  Communication Towers. Communication towers shall only be allowed under the provisions for a concealed support structure as defined under the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  Fences and Walls. Where provided and where visible from the right-of-way of a public road, fences and walls shall be composed of iron, stone, masonry, or concrete. Landscaping should be used to minimize or soften the appearance from the public right-of-way. Chain link fencing shall not be permitted except in side or rear yards of residential developments and shall be screened with vegetation to a height of six feet. 
3.  Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-through facilities shall be located to the rear or side of the building and shall not abut an amenity zone or face the corridor arterial roadway. 
H.  Gas Station Pump Islands. Gas station pump islands must be mostly obscured from view from the highway, either through location or by plantings or other methods. Pump islands shall only house gas pumps, windshield-cleaning materials, and trash receptacles. Canopies for gas pumps must have architectural style and detail such as gabled or hip roofs with a three to 12 roof pitch or higher. All support columns must be brick, brick veneer, or stone construction. Buildings located at establishments selling gasoline must comply with section 2.5.19.K (Architecture). Canopies shall only display logo identification signs. No other advertising is allowed. 
I.  Outside Display and Storage and Service Areas. 
1.  Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, forklifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by this Ordinance. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses, and to protect the outdoor area of the subject property. 
(A)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and residential district lines. 
(B)  Outdoor storage, loading, and operations shall be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. 
(C)  Outdoor storage, trash collection and/or compaction, loading or other such uses shall be located in the rear of the lot. If, because of lot configuration, the director of inspections and code determines that such placement is not feasible, then the side yard may be used, but in no case shall such area(s) be located within 15 feet of any public street, public sidewalk, or on-site pedestrian way. 
(D)  Seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, bedding plants, etc., may be displayed in any outdoor area up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total not to exceed eight weeks per year. 
(E)  Areas for the storage and sale of all other merchandise shall be permanently defined and screened with walls or fences. Materials, colors, and design of screening walls or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the colors on the building. 
(F)  No products containing toxic chemicals, such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, cement, etc., shall be stored in any uncovered outside location where they might enter the stormwater drainage system in the event of any spillage, breakage, or tearing of the container. 
J.  Stormwater Detention Facilities. Open storm drainage and detention areas visible from the corridor should be landscaped and incorporated into the design of the development as an attractive amenity. Wet-bottom basins are encouraged. 
K.  Architecture. The following requirements shall not apply to single-family residential developments: 
1.  Architectural design shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(A)  Building facades visible from roadways or public parking areas shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the planning director. 
(B)  Metal-sided or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(C)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be of colors compatible with the building and subject to approval and limited to the following materials: 
1)  Metal standing seam. 
2)  Tile, slate or stone. 
3)  Wood shake. 
4)  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
5)  Other materials subject to approval. 
(D)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of the subject property, or at least equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is less. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement. 
2.  Any accessories provided, such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks, shall complement the building design and style. 
3.  Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(A)  To lend the appearance of multitenant occupancy, facades of multitenant buildings shall be varied in depth or parapet height. 
(B)  Distinct architectural entry identification for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(C)  All out parcel buildings within a proposed development shall be of an architectural character comparable to the primary structure as determined by the Planning Department. 
(D)  Walls visible from roadways or public parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(E)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be three feet, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(F)  Articulation of building design shall continue on all facades visible to the general public. 
(G)  Building elevation plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Director, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a building permit. Designs, which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines, may be denied. 
H.  Land Use and Plan Review. The Planning Director shall evaluate all proposed development activities in the U.S. Highway 80 Corridor. No development permit, land use permit, or building permit shall be issued unless the proposed development, land use, building, or structure is in compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-43, § 1, 7-13-07; Ord. No. 14-19, § 7, 5-27-14) 
Section 2.5.20. - Veterans Parkway Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purposes of this section are to: 
1.  Promote and enhance the aesthetic qualities of development within the arterial road corridor of Veterans Parkway through the implementation of land use regulations, and within which amenity features are encouraged. 
2.  Provide management of the location and intensity of development within the arterial road corridor and to concentrate development in focus areas. 
3.  Provide safe access by vehicles and pedestrians to destinations in the corridor in a manner that does not conflict with access to individual developments or the roadway's primary purpose. 
4.  Promote the minimization of visual clutter along the city's major roadways. 
5.  Provide a quality and sustainable living environment for the citizens of Columbus. 
6.  Provide effective transitions between different uses, by planting trees, shrubs, groundcover and other landscaping material in open space areas, which enhance development of the urban environment by promoting shade, cooling the air through evaporation, restoring oxygen to the atmosphere, reducing glare and noise levels, and promoting an ecological habitat for animal and plant species. 
7.  Provide greater control over the aesthetic and functional characteristics of development along major thoroughfares and roadways that serve as major entrances to the community, where higher development standards can effectively enhance the city's image as a desirable place to live, work and shop. 
B.  Definitions. 
Amenity : Pedestrian shelters, gazebos, decorative paving, pathways and sidewalks, trees, landscaping, retention ponds when designed according to the specifications of this ordinance, signage when scaled to the pedestrian and constructed of materials and sizes specified in this ordinance and other aesthetic features and characteristics approved by the city. 
Corridor : All lands that are undeveloped and/or any developed lands that are redeveloped after the date of adoption of this ordinance which are located within 750 feet of the right-of-way of Veterans Parkway (from Williams Road/Moon Road, North to the county line) with a 750-foot depth at each intersection, or as shown on the official zoning, land use, or corridor maps. 
Focus areas : An area of land within the corridor, at the intersection of the corridor and any other intersecting public road. Unless more specifically shown on the corridor overlay map, a focus area shall be generally limited to a square parcel of land extending 750 feet from the intersection to which it pertains, in both directions along the road rights-of-way. The focus area includes approximately seventeen (17) acres at each quadrant and can be larger or smaller by mutual agreement of the city and other interested parties. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This ordinance shall apply to all properties lying within the Veterans Parkway Corridor, as shown on the official zoning map and the overlay district map, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. Single-family residential homes are excluded from this ordinance. No clearing or other disturbance of land shall occur, and no building, structure or use shall be established, except in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  These standards shall apply to all redevelopment activities. Redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site. 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square footage of building's or a site's physical development by 50 percent or greater, from the date of the ordinance inception. 
3.  This Section 2.5.20 shall not apply to any land that on the date of the adoption of this section was, and thereafter remains, in a Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial Zoning (HMI) District, except, however, for that part, if any, of any HMI land located within 125 feet of the right-of-way of Veterans Parkway (the "125-foot buffer"), which 125-foot buffer, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(A)  There shall be no development within the 125-foot buffer, other than the following development stipulated under 3. (A)(1), (2), (3), and/or (4) hereof, which development permitted hereunder, in any event, shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable provisions of the UDO: 
(1)  Private roadways and driveways; 
(2)  Monument style signs; 
(3)  Underground utilities, and 
(4)  Berms with planted trees similar to existing trees or undisturbed natural vegetation, but with the height limitation of Section 4.5.8 hereof being inapplicable with respect thereto. 
(B)  Except, only, as is required for the development permitted in Section 3. (A)(1), (2), (3), and/or (4) hereof, the 125-foot buffer shall consist of the current undisturbed natural vegetation located thereon. 
(C)  Any berm beyond 125 feet shall be planted with trees and other vegetation similar to existing vegetation located thereon. 
D.  Encouraged Uses. Mixed uses such as commercial, civic spaces, institutional uses and residences (including residential use in the same building with commercial), and office or other uses, are especially encouraged within focus areas. 
E.  Design Requirements/Access. 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure. 
(A)  Vehicular Access to Site. Within the corridor, the subdivision of lots along an arterial road shall not be allowed if designed so that each lot has its own individual access to the major road unless approved by the Director of Engineering. Each pod of development, or if subdivided, each lot (including out parcels), shall be connected with on-site access to a frontage road or interconnecting driveway, rather than directly to the arterial road. 
(B)  Private Roadway/Driveways. All private access to Veterans Parkway shall be right-in/right-out and at intervals no closer than 300 feet as measured from the center-of-access to center-of-access roadway/driveways. Two-way access may be allowed at existing median breaks or at new median breaks at intervals of 1,320 feet only with the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Director of Engineering for the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(C)  Interparcel Access. All land parcels, excluding single-family residential, fronting the Corridor right-of-way shall have interparcel connectivity via either a frontage road or a travel way that is delineated from parking areas such that short trips between developments can be made without use of the major road within the corridor. Within a focus area, development shall interconnect with the road or travel way network of any adjacent development or site within the focus area unless the Director of Engineering determines such connection would constitute an undue hardship. 
(D)  Medians. Private roads and entrances to developments connecting with the arterial road in the corridor or serving development in a focus area shall include center medians. Such roadway designs will be based upon projected traffic volume and the number of parking spaces. Medians are desired because they improve traffic safety and can be planted to enhance the overall appearance of the focus area, as well as provide refuge for pedestrians. 
(E)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required, located, and constructed as established under Chapter 7, Article 10, Subsections 7.10.2 and 7.10.3 of the Unified Development Ordinance and shall be adjacent to all non-limited access public rights-of-way. 
(F)  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access should be provided to individual developments from any sidewalk, unless topography prohibits construction of facilities meeting Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Where medians are required, pedestrian access shall be provided across the median as approved by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Retail Developments. For retail developments totaling 200,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area; or uses that result in a building of 100,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area whether by new construction or by expansion of existing uses, such developments shall also comply with the Retail Developments of Community Significance section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
3.  Utility Location. All new utility lines serving a development constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be located underground. 
4.  Landscaping Requirements. 
(A)  General. All developments shall be landscaped, screened, and buffered in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Chapter 4 of the Unified Development Ordinance except 20 Tree Density Unit (TDU) per acre for all non-residential development shall be required. If the TDU requirement cannot be met, an administrative variance or tree replacement fund may be granted by the City Arborist according to Chapter 4, Articles 5 and 6 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  A minimum fifteen-foot wide landscaped strip adjacent to all road rights-of-way in non-residential developments shall be provided. Parking, merchandise displays, and off-street loading are prohibited in the landscaped strip. 
(C)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided between primary developments and adjacent out parcels in accordance with Section 4.5.8 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(D)  A minimum of one (1) large-maturing tree per forty (40) linear feet of frontage shall be planted in the fifteen-foot wide landscaped strip as required above. Clustering of trees may be permitted if approved by the City Arborist. 
5.  Parking/Yard, Height and Setback. 
(A)  Location of Parking Areas. Buildings should be located at the corner of sites closest to the road intersection, so that the parking areas are screened by the building from view of any public road, and so that the travel path from public sidewalks is shortened. Parking must be located in a way that is not visually dominant. Parking between buildings and an arterial road is discouraged, but if necessary, requirements of section 2.5.19.E.5. (D) (Screening of Parking Areas) must be met. If parking is located in the side or rear yards, any screening may be clustered and need not cover 100 percent of frontage. 
(B)  Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width, or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight feet in width and seventeen (17) feet in depth. 
(C)  All nonresidential developments shall meet the at least one of the following requirements: 
(1)    

 
(2)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principal building), a minimum 18-inch evergreen hedge shall be installed to obscure visibility of the parking lot from the corridor. This evergreen hedge must reach a minimum height of 2.5 feet within 2 years of planting. Screening may be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(3)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principle building), a combination of landscaped earthen berm and evergreen hedge with a minimum height of 18 inches shall be used. The total height of landscaped earthen berm and hedge combination shall reach a minimum height of 2.5 feet at planting. Screening shall be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
6.  Signage. 
(A)  Directional Signs. Billboards and bench signs shall not be permitted in the corridor. To help advertise and direct the motoring public to businesses and activities in focus areas that do not directly access the arterial road, or are screened from view, development applicants may provide and seek approval by the city for off-premise joint-use "logo" directional signs. These may be located at the entrance to the focus area, and shall be no more than sixty-four (64) square feet in size and a height of eight (8) feet. Subject to the city's approval, directional logo signs may be placed at corners of intersections or along appropriate portions of the corridor, immediately outside public rights-of-way, to guide customers and patrons from the arterial road and along public frontage roads to their destinations. 
(B)  Monument Signs. Freestanding signs shall be monument style. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. Signs for single businesses shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in size and a height of six (6) feet. Joint identification signs for multiple businesses at one location may have a monument sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in size and a height of eight (8) feet. Marketing, spectacular, inflatable/flying, bench, roof, and mobile/portable signs and street banners, as defined in Sections 4.4.5 of the Unified Development Ordinance are not allowed. Canopy and awning sign(s) shall be limited to fifteen square feet per road frontage, and if lighted, the lettering shall be individually formed and lighted. 
F.  Building Placement, Height and Intensity. 
1.  Placement Generally. Buildings should be arranged so that they help frame and define the fronting arterial road or driveways (i.e., the arterial road in the corridor, an intersecting arterial road, or internal streets or driveways of the development), thus giving deliberate form to streets and sidewalk areas. 
2.  Building Height. Commercial buildings located within or adjacent to a residential zoning district shall not exceed the height to those structures allowed by the zoning in the residential area if the commercial structure is located within 100 feet of the property line of the residential zoned area. 
3.  Building Mass, Intensity and Density. Mass of buildings and building intensity (floor area ratios) should be highest when located closest to the arterial road intersection, transitioning to progressively lower intensities moving outwards to the outer edge of the focus area. Buildings at the outer edge of the focus area should be comparable in mass and intensity with the surrounding neighborhood or existing land uses adjacent and beyond the focus area. 
G.  Provisions for Specific Uses. 
1.  Communication Towers. Communication towers shall only be allowed under the provisions for a concealed support structure as defined under the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  Fences and Walls. Where provided and where visible from the right-of-way of a public road, fences and walls shall be composed of iron, stone, masonry, or concrete. Landscaping should be used to minimize or soften the appearance from the public right-of-way. Chain link fencing shall not be permitted except in side or rear yards of residential developments and shall be screened with vegetation to a height of six (6) feet. 
3.  Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-through facilities shall be located to the rear or side of the building and shall not abut an amenity zone or face the corridor arterial roadway. 
H.  Gas Station Pump Islands. Gas station pump islands must be mostly obscured from view from the highway, either through location or by plantings or other methods. Pump islands shall only house gas pumps, windshield-cleaning materials, and trash receptacles. Canopies for gas pumps shall have architectural style and detail such as gabled or hip roofs with a three to twelve roof pitch or higher. All support columns shall be brick, brick veneer, or stone construction. Buildings located at establishments selling gasoline shall comply with section 2.5.20.K (Architecture). Canopies shall only display logo identification signs. No other advertising is allowed. 
I.  Outside Display and Storage and Service Areas. 
1.  Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by this ordinance. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses, and to protect the outdoor area of the subject property. 
(A)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and residential district lines. 
(B)  Outdoor storage, loading, and operations shall be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. 
(C)  Outdoor storage, trash collection and/or compaction, loading or other such uses shall be located in the rear of the lot. If, because of lot configuration, the Director of Inspections and Code determines that such placement is not feasible, then the side yard may be used, but in no case shall such area(s) be open or face the corridor within a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way along Veterans Parkway. 
(D)  Seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, bedding plants, etc. may be displayed in any outdoor area up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total not to exceed eight weeks per year. 
(E)  Areas for the storage and sale of all other merchandise shall not be located in parking lots, and shall be permanently defined and confined to areas shown on the initial plans submitted for approval to the city. 
(F)  No products containing toxic chemicals, such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, cement, etc., shall be stored in any uncovered outside location where they might enter the stormwater drainage system in the event of any spillage, breakage, or tearing of the container. 
J.  Stormwater Detention Facilities. Open storm drainage and detention areas visible from the corridor shall not be fenced, but shall be landscaped and incorporated into the design of the development as an attractive amenity. Wet-bottom basins are encouraged. 
K.  Architecture. The following requirements shall apply to all properties lying within the Veterans Parkway Corridor except single-family developments. 
1.  Architectural design shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(A)  Building facades visible from roadways or public parking areas shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the Planning Director. 
(B)  Metal-sided or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(C)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be of colors compatible with the building and subject to approval and limited to the following materials: 
1)  Metal standing seam. 
2)  Tile, slate or stone. 
3)  Wood shake. 
4)  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
5)  Architectural shingles (asphalt composition shingles) 
6)  Other materials subject to approval. 
(D)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of the subject property, or at least equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is less. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement. 
2.  Any accessories provided, such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks, shall complement the building design and style. 
3.  Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(A)  To lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy, facades of multi-tenant buildings shall be varied in depth or parapet height. 
(B)  Distinct architectural entry identification for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(C)  All out parcel buildings within a proposed development shall be of architectural character comparable to the primary structure as determined by the Planning Department. 
(D)  Walls visible from roadways or public parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(E)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 150 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be three feet, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(F)  Articulation of building design shall continue on all facades visible to the general public. 
(G)  Building elevation plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Director, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a building permit, to verify compliance with this ordinance. Designs, which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines, may be denied. 
L.  Land Use and Plan Review. The Planning Director shall evaluate all proposed development activities in the Veterans Parkway Corridor. No development permit, land use permit, or building permit shall be issued unless the proposed development, land use, building, or structure is in compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-17, § 1, 5-26-09) 
Section 2.5.21. - Victory Drive Overlay District. 
Highway 27 (4th Street-Victory Drive) (from the Chattahoochee River, east to 1-185), South Lumpkin Road, and Fort Benning Road (south of Victory Drive, north of Fort Benning). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purposes of this section are to: 
1.  Promote and facilitate redevelopment and community improvement activities that foster long-term economic growth and enhance the quality of life in Columbus South. 
2.  Improve and enhance the aesthetic qualities of development within the arterial road corridors of Victory Drive, South Lumpkin Road, and the South end of Fort Benning Road through the implementation of land use regulations, and within which amenity features are encouraged. 
B.  Definitions. 
Amenity : Pedestrian shelters, gazebos, decorative paving, pathways and sidewalks, trees, landscaping, retention ponds when designed according to the specifications of this ordinance, signage when scaled to the pedestrian and constructed of materials and sizes specified in this ordinance and other aesthetic features and characteristics approved by the city. 
Corridor : All lands, on the date of adoption of this ordinance, which are located wholly or partially within the following: 
1.  250 feet of the right-of-way of US Highway 27 (from the Chattachoochee River, east to I-185), with a 250-foot depth at each intersection; 
2.  250 feet of the right-of-way of South Lumpkin Road, with a 250-foot depth at each intersection except Victory Drive, and; 
3.  250 feet of the right-of-way of Fort Benning Road (south of Victory Drive, north of Fort Benning) with a 250-foot depth at each intersection except Victory Drive; or as shown on the official zoning, land use, or corridor maps. 
Focus areas : An area of land within the corridor, at the intersection of the Corridor and any other intersecting public road. Unless more specifically shown on the corridor overlay map, a focus area shall be generally limited to a square parcel of land extending 250 feet from the intersection to which it pertains, in both directions along the road rights-of-way. The focus area includes approximately six (6) acres at each quadrant and can be larger or smaller by mutual agreement of the City and other interested parties. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This ordinance shall apply to all properties lying wholly or partially within the Victory Drive/South Lumpkin Road/Fort Benning Road (south) corridors as shown on the official zoning map and the overlay district map, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. Single-family residential homes are excluded from this ordinance. No clearing or other disturbance of land shall occur, and no building, structure or use shall be established, except in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  These standards shall apply to all redevelopment activities. Redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site. 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square footage of a building's or a site's physical development by 50 percent or greater, from the date of the ordinance inception. 
D.  Encouraged Uses. Mixed uses such as commercial, civic spaces, institutional uses and residences (including residential use in the same building with commercial), and office or other uses, are especially encouraged within focus areas. 
E.  Design Requirements/Access. 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure. 
(A)  Vehicular Access to Site. Within the Corridor, the subdivision of properties along an arterial road shall not be allowed if designed so that each property has its own individual access to the major road unless approved by the Director of Engineering. Each pod of development, or if subdivided, each lot (including out parcels), shall be connected with on-site access to a frontage road or interconnecting driveway, rather than directly to the arterial road. 
(B)  Private Roadway/Driveways. All private access to US Highway 27 (from the Chattahoochee River, east to I-185), South Lumpkin Road, and Fort Benning Road (from Victory Drive, east to Fort Benning) shall be right-in/right-out and at intervals no closer than 300 feet as measured from the center-of-access to center-of-access roadway/driveways. Two-way access may be allowed at existing median breaks or at new median breaks at intervals of 1,320 feet only with the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Director of Engineering for the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(C)  Interparcel Access. All properties, excluding single-family residential, fronting the corridor right-of-way that are subdivided either into multiple, smaller parcels or outparcels to a larger development shall, upon determination by the City Engineer, provide for interparcel access so that short trips between developments can be made without use of the major road within the corridor. 
(D)  Medians. Private roads and entrances to developments connecting with the arterial road in the corridor or serving development in a focus area shall include center medians. Such roadway designs will be based upon projected traffic volume and the number of parking spaces. Medians are desired because they improve traffic safety and can be planted to enhance the overall appearance of the focus area, as well as provide refuge for pedestrians. 
(E)  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access should be provided to individual developments from any sidewalk, unless topography prohibits construction of facilities meeting Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Where medians are required, pedestrian access shall be provided across the median as approved by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Utility Location. All new utility lines serving a new development or 100 percent redevelopment constructed after the effective date of this ordinance, are required to be underground. 
3.  Landscaping Requirements. 
(A)  General. All developments shall be landscaped, screened, and buffered in accordance with Section 4 Article 6 of the Unified Development Ordinance except fifteen (15) tree density units per acre for all non-residential developments shall be required. 
(B)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip adjacent to all road rights-of-way in nonresidential developments shall be provided. Parking, merchandise displays, and off-street loading are prohibited in the landscaped strip. 
(C)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided between primary developments and its adjacent out parcels in accordance with Chapter 4 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(D)  A minimum of one (1) large-maturing tree per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage shall be planted in the area adjacent to and along the right-of-way. Clustering of trees may be permitted. 
(E)  Trash areas shall be located at a minimum of 100 feet from any public road right-of-way. 
4.  Parking/Yard, Height and Setback. 
(A)  Location of Parking Areas. Buildings should be located at the corner of sites closest to the road intersection, so that the parking areas are screened by the building from view of any public road, and so that the travel path from public sidewalks is shortened. Parking must be located in a way that is not visually dominant. Parking between buildings and an arterial road is discouraged, but at a minimum, requirements of Section 2.5.21.E.4(C) must be met. If parking is located in the side or rear yards, any screening may be clustered and need not cover 100 percent of frontage. 
(B)  Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width, or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight feet in width and seventeen (17) feet in depth. 
(C)  All nonresidential developments shall meet the at least one of the following requirements: 
(1)    

 
(2)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principle building), a minimum 18-inch evergreen hedge shall be installed to obscure visibility of the parking lot from the corridor. This evergreen hedge must reach a minimum height of 2.5 feet within 2 years of planting. Screening may be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(3)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principle building), a combination of landscaped earthen berm and evergreen hedge with a minimum height of 18 inches shall be used. The total height of landscaped earthen berm and hedge combination shall reach a minimum height of 2.5 feet at planting. Screening shall be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(D)  Auto/truck sales shall be excluded from the requirements of this section. 
5.  Signage. 
(A)  Directional Signs. Bench, inflatable, banner, and portable signs shall not be permitted in the corridor. To help advertise and direct the motoring public to businesses and activities in focus areas that do not directly access the arterial road, or are screened from view, development applicants may provide and seek approval by the city for off-premise joint-use "logo" directional signs. These may be located at the entrance to the focus area, and shall be no more than sixty-four (64) square feet in size and height of eight (8) feet. Subject to the city's approval, directional logo signs may be placed at corners of intersections or along appropriate portions of the corridor, immediately outside public rights-of-way, to guide customers and patrons from the arterial road and along public frontage roads to their destinations. 
(B)  On Premise Signs. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. Signs for single businesses shall be in compliance with Chapter 4 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
F.  Building Placement, Height and Intensity. 
1.  Building Height. Buildings located along the South Lumpkin Road corridor that are abutting a residential zoned area shall not exceed the permitted height as dictated by the requirements of the adjoining residentially zoned area. 
G.  Provisions for Specific Uses. 
1.  Communication Towers. Communication towers shall only be allowed under the provisions for a concealed support structure as defined under the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  Fences and Walls. Where provided and where visible from the right-of-way of a public road, fences and walls shall be composed of iron, stone, masonry, or concrete. Wood is acceptable when used in combination with other approved materials. Landscaping should be used to minimize or soften the appearance from the public right-of-way. Chain link fencing shall not be permitted except in side or rear yards of residential developments and shall be screened with vegetation to a height of six (6) feet. 
3.  Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-through facilities shall be located to the rear or side of the building and shall not abut an amenity zone or face the corridor arterial roadway. 
H.  Gas Station Pump Islands. Pump islands shall only house gas pumps, windshield-cleaning materials, and trash receptacles. All support columns shall be brick, brick veneer, or stone construction. Buildings located at establishments selling gasoline shall comply with Chapter 2 of the Unified Development Ordinance. Canopies shall only display logo identification signs. No other advertising is allowed. 
I.  Outside Display and Storage and Service Areas. 
1.  Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by this ordinance. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses, and to protect the outdoor area of the subject property. 
(A)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and residential district lines. 
(B)  Outdoor storage, loading, and operations shall be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. 
(C)  Seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, bedding plants, etc. may be displayed in any outdoor area up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total not to exceed eight weeks per year. 
(D)  Areas for the storage and sale of all other merchandise shall be permanently defined and screened with walls or fences, but shall not be located in parking lots. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the colors on the building. 
(E)  No products containing toxic chemicals, such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, cement, etc., shall be stored in any uncovered outside location where they might enter the stormwater drainage system in the event of any spillage, breakage, or tearing of the container. 
2.  Auto/truck sales shall be excluded from the requirements of this section. 
J.  Stormwater Detention Facilities. Open storm drainage and detention areas visible from the corridor should be landscaped and incorporated into the design of the development as an attractive amenity. Wet-bottom basins are encouraged. 
K.  Architecture. The following requirements shall apply to all properties except single-family developments. 
1.  Architectural design shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(A)  Building facades visible from roadways or public parking areas shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete and metal or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the Planning Director. 
(B)  Portable buildings and storage containers are only allowed when they are not visible from the main corridor. 
(C)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be of colors compatible with the building and subject to approval and limited to the following materials: 
1)  Metal standing seam. 
2)  Tile, slate or stone. 
3)  Wood shake. 
4)  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
5)  Architectural shingles (asphalt composition shingles). 
(D)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from subject corridors to the subject property, at least equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is less. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement. 
2.  Any accessories provided, such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks, shall complement the building design and style. 
3.  Architectural design of all buildings in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor space or 100 linear feet in road frontage facade shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(A)  Distinct architectural entry identification for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(B)  All out parcel buildings within a proposed development shall be of an architectural character comparable to the primary structure as determined by the Planning Department. 
(C)  Walls visible from roadways or public parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(D)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be three feet, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(E)  Articulation of building design shall continue on all facades visible to the general public. 
(F)  Building elevation plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Director, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. Designs, which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines, may be denied. 
L.  Land Use and Plan Review. The Planning Director shall evaluate all proposed development activities to insure compliance with this Overlay District Ordinance with the same administrative authority as directed under Chapter 12 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 09-47, § 1, 9-22-09) 
Section 2.5.22. - Manchester Expressway Overlay District Ordinance. 
A.  Purpose and Intent . 
The purposes of this section are to: 
1.  Provide greater control over the vegetative characteristics of development along Manchester Expressway, where higher development standards can effectively enhance the City's image as a desirable place to live. 
2.  Promote preservation of landscaping material in open space areas, which add a valuable visual effect to the corridor by providing shade, cooling the air through evaporation, restoring oxygen to the atmosphere, reducing glare and noise levels, and providing opportunities for ecological habitats. 
3.  Promote coordinated development designs to minimize signage and the placement of cell towers, unified landscaping, and a higher standard of site design. 
4.  Provide greater control over the aesthetic and functional characteristics of development along major thoroughfares and roadways that serve as major entrances to the community, where higher development standards can effectively enhance the City's image as a desirable place to live, work and shop. 
B.  Definitions . 
Corridor: All lands that are undeveloped and/or any developed lands that are redeveloped after the date of adoption of this ordinance which are located within 250 feet of the right-of-way of Manchester Expressway (from J.R. Allen Parkway to the Harris County Line) with a 1,000-foot depth at each intersection, or as shown on the official zoning, land use, or corridor maps. 
Focus areas: An area of land within the Corridor, at the intersection of the Corridor and any other intersecting public road. Unless more specifically shown on the corridor overlay map, a focus area shall be generally limited to a square parcel of land extending 1,000 feet from the intersection to which it pertains, in both directions along the road rights-of-way. The focus area includes approximately 23 acres at each quadrant and can be larger or smaller by mutual agreement of the City and other interested property owners. In areas that overlap the Highway 80 Overlay District, the standards of said District shall take precedence over this ordinance. 
C.  Applicability . 
1.  This Ordinance shall apply to all properties lying wholly or partially within the Manchester Expressway Corridor from the northern boundary of the US Highway 80 Overlay District (as amended from time to time) to the Harris County line as shown on the official zoning map and the overlay district map, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance. Single-family residential homes are excluded from this ordinance. No clearing or other disturbance of vegetation or land shall occur, and no building, structure or use shall be established, except in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  These standards shall apply to all redevelopment activities. Redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site. 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square footage of building's or a site's physical development by 50 percent or greater, from the date of the Ordinance inception. 
D.  Development Standards . A corridor buffer of at least 40 feet shall be provided within the required development setback, abutting the right-of-way of the scenic corridor. Where existing trees and significant vegetation exist within the roadway buffer, they shall be retained as determined appropriate and directed by the City Arborist. Where such existing trees and significant vegetation are sparse, they may require re-planting. Vegetation within a roadway buffer that is required to remain within a roadway buffer may be pruned and/or removed only if necessary to ensure proper sight visibility, remove safety hazards or dying or diseased vegetation, or for other good cause as approved by the city. 
E.  Design Requirements/Access . 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
(A)  Interparcel Access . All land parcels, excluding single-family residential, fronting the Corridor right-of-way shall have interparcel connectivity via either a frontage road or a travel way that is delineated from parking areas such that short trips between developments can be made without use of the major road within the corridor. Within a focus area, development shall interconnect with the road or travel way network of any adjacent development or site within the focus area unless the Director of Engineering determines such connection would constitute an undue hardship. 
(B)  Medians . Private roads and entrances to developments connecting with the public access road in the Corridor or serving development in a Focus Area shall include center medians. Such roadway designs will be based upon projected traffic volume and the number of parking spaces. Medians are desired because they improve traffic safety and can be planted to enhance the overall appearance of the Focus Area, as well as provide refuge for pedestrians. 
(C)  Sidewalks . Sidewalks shall be required, located, and constructed as established under Chapter 7, Article 10, Subsections 7.10.2 and 7.10.3 of the Unified Development Ordinance and shall be adjacent to all non-limited access public rights-of-way. 
(D)  Pedestrian Access . Pedestrian access should be provided to individual developments from any sidewalk, unless topography prohibits construction of facilities meeting Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Where medians are required, pedestrian access shall be provided across the median as approved by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Retail Developments . For retail developments totaling 200,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area; or uses that result in a building of 100,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area whether by new construction or by expansion of existing uses, such developments shall also comply with the Retail Developments of Community Significance section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
3.  Utility Location . All new utility lines serving a development constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be located underground. 
4.  Landscaping Requirements . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
(A)  General . All developments shall be landscaped, screened, and buffered in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Chapter 4 of the Unified Development Ordinance except 20 Tree Density Unit (TDU) per acre for all nonresidential development shall be required. If the TDU requirement cannot be met, an administrative variance or tree replacement fund may be granted by the City Arborist according to Chapter 4, Articles 5 and 6 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  A minimum fifteen-foot wide landscaped strip adjacent to all road rights-of-way in nonresidential developments shall be provided. Parking, merchandise displays, and off-street loading are prohibited in the landscaped strip. 
(C)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided between primary developments and adjacent out parcels in accordance with Section 4.5.8 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(D)  A minimum of one large-maturing tree per 40 linear feet of frontage shall be planted in the fifteen-foot wide landscaped strip as required above. Clustering of trees may be permitted if approved by the City Arborist. 
5.  Parking/Yard, Height and Setback . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
(A)  Location of Parking Areas . Buildings should be located at the corner of sites closest to the road intersection, so that the parking areas are screened by the building from view of any public road, and so that the travel path from public sidewalks is shortened. Parking must be located in a way that is not visually dominant. Parking between buildings and an arterial road is discouraged, but if necessary, requirements of section 2.5.19.E.5. (D) (Screening of Parking Areas) must be met. If parking is located in the side or rear yards, any screening may be clustered and need not cover 100 percent of frontage. 
(B)  Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width, or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight feet in width and 17 feet in depth. 
(C)  All nonresidential developments shall meet the at least one of the following requirements: 
(1)    

 
(2)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principal building), a minimum 18-inch evergreen hedge shall be installed to obscure visibility of the parking lot from the Corridor. This evergreen hedge must reach a minimum height of 2.5 feet within 2 years of planting. Screening may be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
(3)  When parking areas are provided in a front yard (in between a public road right-of-way and a principle building), a combination of landscaped earthen berm and evergreen hedge with a minimum height of 18 inches shall be used. The total height of landscaped earthen berm and hedge combination shall reach a minimum height of two and one-half feet at planting. Screening shall be located in the planting yard if it does not impede other uses or purposes of the yard. 
6.  Signage . 
(A)  Directional Signs . Billboards and bench signs shall not be permitted in the corridor. To help advertise and direct the motoring public to businesses and activities in Focus Areas that do not directly access the arterial road, or are screened from view, development applicants may provide and seek approval by the City for off-premise joint-use "logo" directional signs. These may be located at the entrance to the focus area, and shall be no more than 64 square feet in size and a height of eight feet. Subject to the City's approval, directional logo signs may be placed at corners of intersections or along appropriate portions of the corridor, immediately outside public rights-of-way, to guide customers and patrons from the arterial road and along public frontage roads to their destinations. 
(B)  Monument Signs . Freestanding signs shall be monument style. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. Signs for single businesses shall not exceed 36 square feet in size and a height of six feet. Joint identification signs for multiple businesses at one location may have a monument sign not to exceed 64 square feet in size and a height of eight feet. Marketing, spectacular, inflatable/flying, bench, roof, and mobile/portable signs and street banners, as defined in Sections 4.4.5 of the Unified Development Ordinance are not allowed. Canopy and awning sign(s) shall be limited to 15 square feet per road frontage, and if lighted, the lettering shall be individually formed and lighted. 
F.  Building Placement, Height and Intensity . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
1.  Placement Generally . Buildings should be arranged so that they help frame and define the fronting arterial road or driveways (i.e., the arterial road in the corridor, an intersecting arterial road, or internal streets or driveways of the development), thus giving deliberate form to streets and sidewalk areas. 
2.  Building Height . Commercial buildings located within or adjacent to a residential zoning district shall not exceed the height to those structures allowed by the zoning in the residential area if the commercial structure is located within 100 feet of the property line of the residential zoned area. 
3.  Building Mass, Intensity and Density . Mass of buildings and building intensity (floor area ratios) should be highest when located closest to the arterial road intersection, transitioning to progressively lower intensities moving outwards to the outer edge of the focus area. Buildings at the outer edge of the focus area should be comparable in mass and intensity with the surrounding neighborhood or existing land uses adjacent and beyond the focus area. 
G.  Provisions for Specific Uses . 
1.  Communication Towers . Communication towers shall only be allowed under the provisions for a Concealed Support Structure as defined under the Unified Development Ordinance. 
2.  Fences and Walls . Where provided and where visible from the right-of-way of a public road, fences and walls shall be composed of iron, stone, masonry, or concrete. Landscaping should be used to minimize or soften the appearance from the public right-of-way. Chain link fencing shall not be permitted except in side or rear yards of residential developments and shall be screened with vegetation to a height of six feet. 
3.  Drive-Through Facilities . Drive-through facilities shall be located to the rear or side of the building and shall not abut an amenity zone or face the Corridor arterial roadway. 
H.  Gas Station Pump Islands . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
Gas station pump islands must be mostly obscured from view from the Highway, either through location or by plantings or other methods. Pump islands shall only house gas pumps, windshield-cleaning materials, and trash receptacles. Canopies for gas pumps shall have architectural style and detail such as gabled or hip roofs with a three to 12 roof pitch or higher. All support columns shall be brick, brick veneer, or stone construction. Buildings located at establishments selling gasoline shall comply with section 2.5.20.K (Architecture). Canopies shall only display logo identification signs. No other advertising is allowed. 
I.  Outside Display and Storage and Service Areas . 
1.  Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by this ordinance. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses, and to protect the outdoor area of the subject property. 
(A)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and residential district lines. 
(B)  Outdoor storage, loading, and operations shall be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. 
(C)  Outdoor storage, trash collection and/or compaction, loading or other such uses shall be located in the rear of the lot. If, because of lot configuration, the Director of Inspections and Code determines that such placement is not feasible, then the side yard may be used, but in no case shall such area(s) be open or face the corridor within a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way along Manchester Expressway. 
(D)  Seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, bedding plants, etc. may be displayed in any outdoor area up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total not to exceed eight weeks per year. 
(E)  Areas for the storage and sale of all other merchandise shall not be located in parking lots, and shall be permanently defined and confined to areas shown on the initial plans submitted for approval to the City. 
(F)  No products containing toxic chemicals, such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, cement, etc., shall be stored in any uncovered outside location where they might enter the stormwater drainage system in the event of any spillage, breakage, or tearing of the container. 
J.  Stormwater Detention Facilities . The following requirements shall only be required within the Focus Areas. 
Open storm drainage and detention areas visible from the corridor shall not be fenced, but shall be landscaped and incorporated into the design of the development as an attractive amenity. Wet-bottom basins are encouraged. 
K.  Architecture . The following requirements shall apply to all properties lying within the Manchester Expressway Corridor except single-family developments. 
1.  Architectural design shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(A)  Building facades visible from roadways or public parking areas shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the Planning Director. 
(B)  Metal-sided buildings shall be prohibited in all zones except the existing LMI (Light Manufacturing/Industrial) zoning districts. 
1)  In the existing LMI zoning districts, rear and sides of a building may have metal facades. 
2)  In the existing LMI zoning districts, a metal building that exceeds 20 feet at the roofline shall be required to have 30 percent of the metal building facades visible from roadways shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the Planning Director. 
(C)  Portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(D)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be of colors compatible with the building and subject to approval and limited to the following materials: 
1)  Metal standing seam. 
2)  Tile, slate or stone. 
3)  Wood shake. 
4)  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
5)  Architectural shingles (asphalt composition shingles). 
6)  Other materials subject to approval. 
(E)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of the subject property, or at least equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is less. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement. 
(F)  In the LMI (Light Manufacturing/Industrial) zoning district. 
2.  Any accessories provided, such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks, shall complement the building design and style. 
3.  Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(A)  To lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy, facades of multi-tenant buildings shall be varied in depth or parapet height. 
(B)  Distinct architectural entry identification for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(C)  All out parcel buildings within a proposed development shall be of architectural character comparable to the primary structure as determined by the Planning Department. 
(D)  Walls visible from roadways or public parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(E)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 150 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be three feet, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(F)  Articulation of building design shall continue on all facades visible to the general public. 
(G)  Building elevation plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Director, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, to verify compliance with this ordinance. Designs, which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines, may be denied. 
L.  Land Use and Plan Review . The Planning Director shall evaluate all proposed development activities in the Manchester Expressway Corridor. No development permit, land use permit, or building permit shall be issued unless the proposed development, land use, building, or structure is in compliance with this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-61, § 1, 11-4-14) 
Chapter 3 - USE REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 3.1.1. - Permitted, Special Exception and Prohibited Uses. 
A.  Permitted, Special Exception, and Prohibited Uses. Permitted uses, conditional uses, and prohibited uses are established in Table 3.1.1. The use of all new or existing buildings, structures, and properties shall conform to the requirements of this table. 
B.  Additional Standards. Additional standards applicable to certain uses are indicated in Table 3.1.1 by an asterisk in the "Notes" column. The standards are listed in Article 2 following the table. Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, the additional standards shall apply to each use as indicated in this Article. 
C.  Compliance. All uses identified in Table 3.1.1 shall comply with all applicable requirements of this UDO. 
D.  Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, uses shall be defined as indicated below. 
1.  Permitted Use. Any use allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject to administrative review and compliance with all requirements contained in this UDO. 
2.  Special Exception Use. Any use that may be allowed, subject to review and consideration by the Planning Advisory Commission and Council as set forth in Article 2 of Chapter 10. 
3.  Prohibited Uses. Any use not listed as a permitted or special exception use in Table 3.1.1, or not recognized as a similar use, is a prohibited use, and shall not be established. 
E.  Similar Uses. A use not listed in Table 3.1.1, but possessing similar characteristics, including but not limited to size, intensity, density, operating hours, demands for public facilities such as water and sewer, traffic impacts, manufacturing and business practices, may be established upon approval by the Director. 
1.  Applicable Standards. Such uses shall be subject to all standards and requirements of the uses to which they are similar. 
2.  Appeals. Appeals of such determinations shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Section 3.1.2. - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Status. For the purposes of this UDO, accessory uses are those uses that are customary, incidental and subordinate to a principal use. 
B.  Establishment. An accessory use cannot be established, constructed, installed or otherwise implemented except in direct association with an existing principal use. 
Section 3.1.3. - Variances from Additional Standards. 
A.  Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance from the additional standards applicable to permitted or special exception uses established in Article 2 of this Chapter. 
B.  Board of Historic and Architectural Review. 
1.  Variance May be Granted. The Board of Historic and Architectural Review may grant a variance from the additional standards applicable to permitted or special exception uses established in Article 2 of this Chapter for property located within the HIST zoning district or other property that has been recognized by the federal or state government as a landmark building or structure. 
2.  Compliance with Variance Requirements. A request for variance approval shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 9 and 10. In addition, a request for variance shall comply with each of the standards listed below. 
(A)  The variance will allow a building, structure or use to remain in or to become in context with its surroundings. 
(B)  The variance will allow a building, structure or use to be compatible with the neighborhood or area in which located. 
(C)  The variance will allow improvements to a building, structure or use that will enhance its historic architecture, grounds or other improvements. 
(D)  The variance will allow a building, structure or use to contribute to the overall fabric of the HIST zoning district. 
Section 3.1.4. - Waiver. 
A waiver from the additional standards applicable to certain uses established herein may be granted by the Council as part of approval of a master planned development, subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 2. 
Section 3.1.5. - Master Planned Developments (MPD). 
A.  Permitted, Special Exception and Prohibited Uses. The permitted, special exception and prohibited uses within a master planned district (MPD) are established by the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Exception. In addition to the provisions of Table 3.1.1, uses may be established within the development approval by the Council. Uses not normally permitted within a MPD may be approved subject to the following standards: 
1.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Consistency with the overall purpose and intent of this unified development ordinance; and 
3.  Compatibility with existing, proposed, or potential land uses located on adjacent properties. 
Table 3.1.1. Permitted, Special Exception and Prohibited Uses 

 
Note— 1. Refer to Section 3.2.72 Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 06-91, § 1, 10-17-06; Ord. No. 07-2, § 1, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 07-54, § 1, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 07-75, § 1, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 08-44, § 1, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 08-57, § 1, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 09-52, § 1, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 10-34, § 1, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 10-41, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 10-52, § 1, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 11-31, § 1, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 14-28, § 1, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 14-19, § 11, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 15-6, § 1, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-52, § 2, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 15-55, § 2, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 16-16, § 1, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 18-45, § 2, 10-9-18; Ord. No. 19-005, § 1, 2-26-19; Ord. No. 19-011, § 1, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 19-017, § 1, 4-9-19) 
ARTICLE 2. - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC USES 

Section 3.2.1. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this Article shall apply to specific uses located within specific zoning districts as provided in Table 3.1.1. 
Section 3.2.2. - Adult Entertainment. 
An adult entertainment use shall comply with Article IV, Chapter 14 of the City of Columbus Code, and all applicable requirements of that code and this UDO. 
Section 3.2.2.1. - Ambulance Services. 
An ambulance service shall comply with the following standards listed below. 
A.  An ambulance service may be located in a Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zone as a Special exception use as provided in Chapter 10, Article 2, Section 10.2.7.B. 
B.  An ambulance service shall be limited to six (6) operating ambulances on site at any time in a NC (Neighborhood Commercial) Zoning District. 
(Ord. No. 11-31, § 2, 6-28-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-31, § 2, adopted June 28, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 3.2.3.1. To preserve the style of this Code, and for classification purposes, said provisions have been redesignated as § 3.2.2.1. 
Section 3.2.3. - Artisans. 
Artisans shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Historic District. In the HIST zoning district, not more than two employees shall work onsite with the principal artisan. 
Section 3.2.4. - Auto/Truck Paint and Body Shop. 
An auto paint and body shop shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
B.  Spray Booths. Spray booths shall comply with all applicable federal, state or county requirements. 
Section 3.2.5. - Auto/Truck Rental. 
An auto rental facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Activities. A rental facility may provide minor maintenance and repairs on site, including brake adjustment, fluid replacement or addition, and vehicle washing and drying. 
B.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
Section 3.2.6. - Auto/Truck Repair, Major. 
A major auto repair facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
B.  Fencing, Walls and Hedges. An opaque wall, consistent with the requirements of Section 4.2.14 shall be provided for all repair services that store wrecked, junked, abandoned or inoperative vehicles. Fencing consistent with the requirements of Section 4.2.14 shall be provided if an opaque wall is not required. 
Section 3.2.7. - Auto/Truck Repair, Minor. 
A minor auto repair facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
B.  Fencing, Walls and Hedges. An opaque wall, consistent with the requirements of Section 4.2.14 shall be provided for all repair services that store wrecked, junked, abandoned or inoperative vehicles. Fencing consistent with the requirements of Section 4.2.14 shall be provided if an opaque wall is not required. 
Section 3.2.8. - Auto/Truck Sales, New and Used. 
A new and used automobile sales dealership shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Minimum Lot Size. 
1.  Permitted Use. Auto/truck sales, new and used, in excess of two (2) acres, shall be located as a permitted use as provided in Section 3.1.1. 
2.  Special Exception. Auto/truck sales, new and used, in excess of one-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet) but less than two (2) acres (87,120 square feet), shall be located as a special exception use as provided in Section 3.1.1. The following additional standards exceeding what is required by Section 10.2.7.B shall apply: 
(A)  A site plan review shall be required. Said site plan shall identify location of buildings, employee and customer parking, and parking for for-sale vehicles. 
(B)  For-sale vehicles shall be limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent lot coverage. 
(C)  Auto/truck sales shall meet all other requirements of this section. 
B.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
C.  Minimum Property Dimensions. Minimum property dimensions are provided in Table 3.2.1. 
Table 3.2.1.  Minimum Property Dimensions Auto/Truck Sales, New and Used 

 
D.  Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses are the following: 
1.  Sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers and similar vehicles; 
2.  Lease of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers and similar vehicles; 
3.  Sale of parts and tires; 
4.  Auto body and paint shop, provided all activities occur within an enclosed building; 
5.  Auto detailing; 
6.  Automatic car wash for dealership autos for sale, lease, or repair; and 
7.  Major and minor auto repairs. 
E.  Repairs and Maintenance. Auto body repair and vehicle repair shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Distance from Residential Zoning District. All repair work shall occur at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district, measured in a straight line from vehicle to the nearest residential district. 
2.  Visibility. Repair work shall not be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
3.  Auto Body Repair and Vehicle Maintenance Prohibited. Auto body repair and vehicle maintenance shall be prohibited on any site less than two acres when any portion of site abuts a residential zoning district. 
F.  Fuel Pumps. 
1.  Location. Facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district, as measured in a straight line from the fuel pump closest to a residential district. 
2.  Visibility. Facilities shall not be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
G.  Vehicle Off-loading. 
1.  Distance. Off-loading shall occur at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Minimum Specifications. The off-loading area shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and 60 feet in length, and shall be marked designated consistent with the requirements of this Code. 
3.  Location. 
(A)  The off-loading area shall not be located in a vehicular circulation area, and shall provide adequate maneuverability. 
(B)  An off-loading area shall not be located on a public right-of-way. 
4.  Transport Vehicles. Transport vehicles shall not be stored or parked on site for more than 24 consecutive hours. 
H.  Screening of Residential Zoning Districts. All dealerships shall install a six foot high opaque wall along all portions of property abutting a residential zoning district. 
I.  Display and Test Driving. 
1.  Public Rights-of-way. Vehicles shall not be displayed within a public right-of-way. 
2.  Test Drives. Test driving of vehicles within residential zoning districts is prohibited. 
J.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Maximum Height. Lighting standards shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
2.  Direction of Lighting. Illumination shall be internally directed away from adjacent properties. 
3.  Shielding. All lighting shall be shielded to prevent the spillover of light and glare onto adjacent properties. 
4.  Other Standards. Unless otherwise provided herein, Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.2. 
K.  Paving. All paved surfaces, including vehicle storage, shall utilize an approved surface as required by the approved site development permit. 
L.  Landscaping. Paved areas and parking lots shall comply with the landscape requirements of Article 6 of Chapter 4. 
M.  Licensure. Dealerships must obtain appropriate federal, state, and local business and occupational licenses. 
N.  Advertising Devices. Flags, banners, streamers, pennants, string lights, and similar devices to attract attention are prohibited, except as allowed by Section 4.4.4.I. 
O.  Vehicle Wash Facilities. 
1.  Restricted Use. Vehicle wash facilities may be utilized only for vehicles under the control of or repair by the dealership. 
2.  Location. Facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  Water Recycling. The City or utilities provider may require installation of water recycling facilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 3-25-08) 
Section 3.2.8.1. - Auto/Truck Brokers. 
An auto/truck broker shall comply with the standards listed below: 
A.  Storage and/or display: The auto/truck broker shall not store or display automobiles and/or trucks. 
(Ord. No. 07-54, § 1, 8-21-07) 
Section 3.2.9. - Auto/Truck Service Station. 
An automobile service station shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Auto Repair Standards. 
1.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
2.  Repair Work. All repair work shall occur within an enclosed structure. 
B.  Vehicular Access. 
1.  Maximum Driveway Width. Maximum driveway width shall not exceed 40 feet at the intersection of the curb or edge or pavement and 30 feet at the property line. 
2.  Driveways. Driveways shall be located at least 15 feet apart, as measured from the intersection with the curb or edge of pavement. 
Section 3.2.10. - Auto/Truck Tire Sales and Installation. 
An auto/truck tire sales and installation establishment shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
Section 3.2.11. - Auto/Truck Wash and Detail Facility. 
An auto wash and detail facility, either self-service or full service, shall comply with the standards of this Section. 
A.  Frontage. 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Frontage. The car wash shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet. 
B.  Traffic Circulation. 
1.  Waiting or Queuing Spaces. At least two waiting or queuing spaces are required for each bay. 
2.  Exiting Spaces. At least one space shall be provided at the exit of each bay. 
C.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
(Ord. No. 08-44, § 1, 8-19-08) 
Section 3.2.12. - Bed and Breakfast Homestay. 
A bed and breakfast homestay shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Maximum Number of Rooms. Not more than four rooms shall be used for lodging purposes. 
D.  Meal Service. Any meal, beverages, or similar items shall be provided only to registered guests. 
E.  Type of Meal Service. Inns shall be limited to providing breakfasts, teas, and wine, cheese, and similar items. 
F.  Other Functions. Homestays located in residential or historic zoning districts shall not offer or host events such as weddings, meetings, dinners, catered parties, and other events of a commercial nature. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09) 
Section 3.2.13. - Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
A.  Location. The inn must be located in a building or buildings that are located within the HIST zoning district. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Multiple Buildings Permitted. A bed and breakfast inn may be located in more than one building or dwelling. 
D.  Maximum Number of Rooms. 
1.  Maximum Rooms per Building. Not more than eight rooms in a single building shall be used for lodging purposes, excluding the residence of the owner, if applicable. 
2.  Maximum Number of Rooms. Not more than 20 rooms shall be used for lodging purposes. 
E.  Functions and Events. Inns may offer or host functions and events such as weddings, meetings, dinners, catered parties, and other events of a commercial nature that are not related to providing lodging, subject to the limits listed below. 
1.  Number of Guests. Not more than 125 guests shall be allowed at an event, excluding those persons providing a service, such as waiters and waitresses, catering or music. 
2.  Duration. All events shall end at or before 10:00 p.m., excluding clean up and related activities. 
(Ord. No. 07-82, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Section 3.2.14. - Boarding or Rooming House. 
A boarding or rooming house shall comply with the standard listed below. 
A.  Sale or Service of Meals. Meals shall not be served or sold to nonresidents. 
Section 3.2.15. - Building and Construction Trades Office and Shop. 
A building construction trades office and shop shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall. Parking of business-related trucks and vehicles is exempt from this requirement. 
B.  Maximum Size. In any commercial zoning district, the maximum size of the office or shop shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
Section 3.2.16. - Cemetery and Mausoleum. 
A cemetery and mausoleum shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Residential Estate Zoning Districts. Cemeteries and mausoleums located in a RE10 or RE5 zoning district shall comply with the standards listed below. 
B.  Minimum Setbacks. Cemeteries shall comply with the distances established in Table 3.2.2. 
Table 3.2.2.  Minimum Distances from Property Lines 

 
C.  Minimum Size. Cemeteries shall consist of at least ten acres. 
D.  Compliance. All cemeteries shall comply with applicable requirements of state or local laws. 
E.  Cemeteries as Accessory Uses. 
1.  Exemption. Accessory cemeteries are exempt from the minimum size and minimum setback requirements of this Section. 
2.  Approval. An accessory cemetery shall be established only upon special exception use approval granted by the Council. 
Section 3.2.17. - Chipmill, Temporary or Portable. 
A temporary or portable chipmill shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Maximum Length. A chipmill shall be utilized on the same property for a period not to exceed six months. 
B.  Use. A chipmill shall process only timber harvested from the property on which located. 
C.  Approval. Special exception use approval shall be obtained prior to use of a chipmill. 
Section 3.2.18. - Clinic, Medical or Dental. 
A medical or dental clinic shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Overnight Stays Prohibited. Excluding emergencies, overnight stays in a clinic are prohibited. 
Section 3.2.19. - Club or Lodge, Membership. 
A club or lodge restricted to members shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Business Operations Prohibited. A club or lodge shall not render a service available or open to the public, which is customarily carried on as a business, excluding temporary events such as fairs, carnivals, and seasonal sales such as Christmas trees. 
Section 3.2.20. - Club or Lodge, Not for Profit. 
A not for profit club or lodge shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Business Operations Prohibited. A club or lodge shall not render a service available to the public, which is customarily carried on as a business, excluding temporary events such as fairs, carnivals, and seasonal sales such as Christmas trees. 
Section 3.2.21. - Convenience Store, No Gas Sales. 
Convenience stores without gas sales shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Sales. Stores may sell convenience food items, including food, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, snacks, tobacco products, ice, and other frequently needed household items. 
B.  Prohibited Sales. Sale of gasoline and diesel products is prohibited. 
C.  General. 
1.  Maximum Sized. Store size shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Hours of Operation. In a NC or PUD zoning or overlay district, hours of operation shall not exceed 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, including deliveries and maintenance. 
Section 3.2.22. - Convenience Stores with Gas Sales. 
Convenience stores with gas sales shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Sales. 
1.  Food and Beverages. Stores may sell convenience food items, including food, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, snacks, tobacco products, ice, and other frequently needed household items. 
2.  Fuel Sales. Sale of gasoline and diesel products is permitted. 
B.  Automatic Car Washes. Installation of automatic car washes is permitted, provided the structures are located at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district. 
C.  Bay or Garage Doors. Bay or garage doors shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.5. 
D.  Prohibited Activities. Auto repairs, excluding drive-in oil change facilities, are prohibited. 
E.  Minimum Setbacks. All pump islands or other service structures shall be located at least 15 feet from any property line or existing or proposed right-of-way line. 
F.  Collocation of Other Uses. Collocation of fast food restaurants with convenience stores may be permitted subject to the following: 
1.  Hours of operation may be limited to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties and uses; 
2.  Adequate parking is provided onsite for all uses; 
3.  Additional screening and landscaping may be required to minimize the impact of co-locating businesses; 
4.  Dumpster, trash, recycling, compacting, and related equipment shall be located at least 100 feet from any property with a residential future land use plan or zoning designation; 
5.  Drive-through windows may be permitted, as limited herein; and 
6.  The number, size, and location of permanent signs shall not increase due to the collocation of uses. 
Section 3.2.23. - Day Care, Type I. 
A Type I day care facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Accessory Use. A Type I shall operate only as an accessory use to the principal residential use of a dwelling. 
B.  Compliance with Building Code. 
1.  Six Clients. Day care for at least six clients may be provided in a residential dwelling that complies with building code requirements for institutional uses. 
2.  Less than Six Clients. Day care for not more than five clients may be provided in a residential dwelling that complies with standard building code requirements for the structure. 
C.  Operator. The operator of the day care facility shall be a resident of the dwelling unit. 
D.  Additional Employees. Additional employees, unless residents of the dwelling unit, are prohibited. 
E.  Pick-up and Drop-off. At least one additional parking space, consistent with the overall character of the dwelling and adjacent property, shall be provided to pick-up and drop-off clients. 
F.  Maximum Number of Clients. 
1.  Number of Children. The maximum number of clients shall not exceed six. 
2.  Relatives of Operator. The relatives of a day care operator, whether related by blood, adoption, or other legal custody, shall not be included in the number of permitted clients as long as day care is provided to not more than eight total clients at any one time. 
G.  Compliance. A Type I day care facility shall comply with all applicable requirements of state or local law. 
Section 3.2.24. - Day Care, Type II. 
A Type II day care facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Maximum Number of Clients. Day care shall be provided for not less than 7 clients and not more than 18 clients. 
B.  Pick-up and Drop-off Facility. In addition to required parking, a pick-up and drop-off facility shall be provided. The facility shall be consistent with City standards. 
C.  Accessory Use. A Type II day care is a permitted accessory use for any principal use that is open to the public, including commercial, educational, industrial or institutional facilities such as hospital or medical centers; places of worship; offices, industrial centers or similar employment centers; medical clinics; public or private recreation centers; public or private schools, and universities or colleges. 
D.  Principal Use. A type II facility may operate as a principle use in any nonresidential zone. 
E.  Compliance. A Type II day care facility shall comply with all applicable requirements of state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 3.2.25. - Day Care, Type III. 
A Type III day care facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Maximum Number of Clients. Day care shall be provided for more than 18 clients. 
B.  Compliance. A Type III day care facility shall comply with all applicable requirements of state or local law. 
C.  Principal Use. 
1.  Day Care as a Principal Use. A Type III day care facility is considered a principal use, whether or not an independent, stand-alone facility or combined with another principal use. The method of approval for a Type III day care shall apply to all proposed independent or combination facilities. 
2.  Residential Zoning Districts. In all residential zoning districts, a Type III day care shall only be operated in association with the following: 
(A)  A place of worship; 
(B)  A public or private school; or 
(C)  A public park, neighborhood center, community center or similar activity. 
(D)  A Type III facility shall only be established as a special exception use. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Pick-up and Drop-off Facility. In addition to required parking, a pick-up and drop-off facility shall be provided. The facility shall be consistent with City standards. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 5-13-08) 
Section 3.2.25.1. - Pet Day Care. 
A pet day care facility shall comply with the following standards listed below. 
A.  Compliance with City Code. Pet day care facilities shall meet all requirements of City Code Section 5-16, Commercial kennels. 
B.  Buildings. Buildings shall be designed and constructed to mitigate noise and odors to limit negative impacts on adjacent properties. Additional noise mitigation will be required for existing buildings not originally built for boarding of animals. 
C.  Overnight Boarding. Overnight boarding is permitted. 
D.  Accessory Uses. Pets may be groomed, trained, exercised, socialized, and boarded overnight; but not bred, sold, or let for hire. 
E.  Location: 
1.  Pet day cares shall be located on a multi-lane arterial road only. 
2.  Pet day cares shall not abut a residentially zoned property. 
3.  Pet day cares shall not be required to locate on arterial roads when located within an industrial park. 
F.  Outdoor Areas: 
1.  The perimeter of all designated outdoor activity areas are to be fully screened from all directions with a wood or masonry fence of at least eight feet (8') in height. 
2.  Designated outdoor activity areas are restricted from use between 7:00 PM to 7:00 AM. 
3.  No more than 4 dogs shall be permitted outside at one time. 
4.  Animals shall be accompanied by a facility employee at all times when outside of the building. 
5.  All walking and exercising of animals must take place on facility grounds in an enclosed area. 
G.  All activities, such as boarding, grooming, and similar activities, shall be restricted to indoor use, excluding the use of outdoor areas as stated in Subsection F. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 1-26-10) 
Section 3.2.26. - Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority Residence. 
A dormitory, fraternity or sorority residence shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Accessory to Certain Institutions. A residence of this nature shall be constructed only as an accessory use to a public or private college, religious school, vocational school, university or similar educational institution or a public or private elementary or secondary school that offers boarding to its students. 
B.  Off-Campus Locations. 
1.  Permitted Locations. When located off-campus, a residence of this nature shall only be constructed in a multifamily, commercial, or planned development zoning district. 
2.  Zoning District Requirements. When located off-campus, a residence of this nature shall comply with all requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
Section 3.2.27. - Dry Cleaning and Laundry, General. 
A dry cleaning and laundry establishment shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Activities. Permitted activities include on-premises washing, drying, dry cleaning, pressing, alterations, shoe repair and tailoring. 
B.  Compliance. A dry cleaning and laundry establishment shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
Section 3.2.28. - Dry Cleaning and Laundry Stations. 
A dry cleaning and laundry station shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Prohibited Activities. Laundry and dry cleaning activities on the premises are prohibited. 
B.  Permitted Activities. Pickup and drop-off of items to be laundered or dry-cleaned. 
C.  Accessory Activities. Accessory activities such as shoe repair, alterations, and tailoring are permitted. 
Section 3.2.29. - Dwellings, Accessory. 
Accessory dwellings shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Types of Accessory Dwellings. Four types of accessory dwellings may be established: 
1.  Employee residence; 
2.  Groom's quarters; 
3.  Guest cottage; and 
4.  Security quarters. 
B.  Standards. Accessory dwellings shall comply with the standards listed in Table 3.2.3. 
C.  Location. An accessory dwelling may be attached or detached from the principal structure. 
D.  Property Development Regulations. The dwellings shall comply with all property development regulations for the principal structure. 
E.  Additional Groom's Quarters Requirements. In addition to the requirements of this Section, installation of groom's quarters shall also comply with the requirements listed below. 
1.  Use. Groom's quarters shall be used as a residence only by individuals employed in the training, care and maintenance of horses and related equestrian activities that occur on the site of the principal dwelling. 
2.  Location. Groom's quarters may be located within barns or as a separate accessory structure. The number of units and maximum permitted size of such units shall determine maximum size of a separate accessory structure. 
3.  Central Facilities. Central bathing and kitchen facilities may be provided. 
4.  Size. The size of bathing, kitchen and similar central facilities must be reasonably related to the maximum number of groom's to be housed on the site. 
5.  Size of Units. Groom's quarters shall not exceed 500 square feet per unit. 
Table 3.2.3.  Standards for Accessory Dwellings 

 
6.  Security Quarters. Residential quarters for security services provided to nonresidential uses may be established subject to the standards listed below. 
(A)  Location. The quarters shall be provided on the premises. 
(B)  Type of Dwelling. The dwelling shall not be a mobile home, but may be a manufactured dwelling. 
(C)  Use. The security quarters shall be used only in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(D)  Utilities and Drainage. Security quarters shall be provided with water, sewer and drainage services consistent with the requirements of this UDO and other applicable regulations of the City. 
(E)  Exception. The Director may approve a special exception use to allow a security quarters in association with an ongoing residential development project, subject to the standards listed below. 
(1)  The dwelling shall not be a mobile home, but may be a manufactured dwelling. 
(2)  The Director may approve such quarters for a period of not to exceed two years. Extensions of not more than six months may be granted to allow completion of the project. 
(3)  Security dwellings shall be located in a manner that is compatible with adjacent properties and residences. 
F.  Additional Employee Residence Requirements. In addition to the requirements of this Section an employee residence shall be restricted to an individual that is: 
1.  Employed in duties directly related to the service, upkeep and maintenance of the principal dwelling; or 
2.  Employed in duties assisting the resident of the principal dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 06-71, § 1, 8-15-06) 
Section 3.2.30. - Dwelling, Multiple Family. 
A multiple family dwelling shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Accessory Uses. Customary or accessory uses to a multifamily dwelling include the following: 
1.  Administrative offices for projects containing more than ten dwelling units; 
2.  Recreation and meeting facilities, including resident meeting rooms, swimming pools, clubhouses, and lighted or unlighted athletic courts; 
3.  Storage facilities for the personal effects of residents; and 
4.  Other uses as may be customary or incidental to a use of this nature. 
Section 3.2.30.1. - Dwelling, Single-family Detached. 
A single-family detached dwelling shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Location. A single-family detached dwelling shall only be permitted in the High Uptown Historic District within the UPT zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, § 1, 11-10-09) 
Section 3.2.31. - Dwelling, Townhouse. 
A townhouse dwelling shall comply the standards listed below, including Table 3.2.4. 
A.  Parking Spaces. 
1.  Location. All required parking spaces shall be provided in a common parking lot or in an enclosed garage that is attached to the unit or in a driveway associated with an enclosed garage. 
2.  Prohibited Parking. Parking in a front or rear yard is prohibited, except in a driveway associated with an enclosed parking garage. Parking may be located in an alley, subject to applicable engineering and public safety requirements. 
Table 3.2.4.  Minimum Property Standards 

 
3.  Definition. For the purposes of this Section, a common parking lot is defined as the parking area for all attached townhouse units or a cluster of attached units. 
B.  Maximum Number of Attached Units. Unless approved by the Council, not more than eight townhouse units in a row shall be attached. 
C.  Platting Required. Townhouse lots or parcels shall be platted, including common areas, recreation areas, parking lots, and any other area within the project. 
Section 3.2.32. - Dwelling, Zero Lot Line. 
A single-family zero lot residential dwelling shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Approval. All residential developments containing zero lot line dwellings shall be reviewed as a special exception use. 
B.  Location on Lot. At least 50 percent of length of one side of the dwelling shall be located along the zero setback line. 
C.  Openings. Openings such as windows and doors shall not be located on the side of the building located along the zero seatback line. However, glass block or similar translucent material shall be permitted subject to the following: 
1.  The material does not exceed ten percent of total wall area; 
2.  The material complies with all building and life safety codes; 
3.  The use is limited only to new construction; and 
4.  The material does not permit more than 60 percent transmission of light. 
D.  Easements. A maintenance easement of not less than five feet shall be provided along the side of the structure located on the zero setback line. 
E.  Encroachments. Roof eaves and foundations located along the zero setback line shall not encroach more than 18 inches into the abutting property. 
F.  Minimum Side Setbacks. 
1.  Non-Zero Setback Side. The minimum setback for the side of the building not located on the zero setback shall be at least ten feet, or the minimum setback of the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
2.  Zero Setback Side. The minimum setback for the side of a dwelling located on the zero setback side shall be zero feet. Any portion of a dwelling located on the zero setback side that is not located on the property line shall be located at least ten feet from such line. 
G.  Minimum Front and Rear Setbacks. Excluding the zero setback side, the front and rear setbacks shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district. 
H.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district. 
I.  Fencing. 
1.  Zero Setback Side. 
(A)  An opaque masonry or wood fence shall be installed along the zero setback side, extending at least ten feet from the rear of the dwelling. The first ten feet of the wall or fence shall be at least six feet in height, but not more than eight feet in height. Additional wall or fencing along the zero setback side may be required by the Council. 
(B)  Screen enclosures for pools, patios, or yards may be installed along the rear portion of the zero setback side. The Council may require additional opaque walls or fencing to provide privacy between adjacent dwellings. 
J.  Gutters. The installation of gutters along all portions of the roof located on the zero setback line is required. 
K.  Driveway Length. A minimum driveway length of 20 feet shall be provided for each dwelling. 
L.  Minimum Parking. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. 
M.  Existing Dwellings. 
1.  Existing Dwellings. Zero lot line dwellings legally constructed prior to the effective date of this Section shall be considered as legal, conforming uses. Expansion of these dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
2.  Vacant Lots. Vacant lots within a zero lot line subdivision or development approved prior to the effective date of this Section may be constructed in accordance with approved site plans, subdivision plat, building permit or other form of development approval granted by Columbus. 
Section 3.2.33. - Equestrian, Commercial. 
A commercial equestrian establishment shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
B.  Permitted Buildings and Facilities. Barns, stables, storage buildings, rings, fields, and similar facilities are permitted. 
C.  Permitted Activities. 
1.  Activities. Permitted uses include raising, breeding, training, boarding, grooming of horses, and similar equestrian-related activities. 
2.  Boarding. Boarding of horses is permitted. 
D.  Principal Use. A commercial equestrian activity may serve as the principal use of property. A single-family dwelling also shall be permitted as an additional principal use. 
E.  Additional Standards. 
1.  Frontage. A minimum frontage of 100 feet on a public or private right-of-way shall be provided. 
2.  Setback. All structures shall comply with the greater of 25 feet or the required setback of the applicable zoning district. 
3.  Groom's Quarters. Groom's quarters may be provided, subject to the requirements of Section 3.2.28. 
Section 3.2.34. - Equestrian, Private. 
A private equestrian establishment shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Use by Residents. The equestrian facilities are limited to use by the residents of the property. Commercial use of the facilities is prohibited. 
B.  Minimum Area per Horse. On any parcel containing private equestrian activities. At least 10,000 square feet per horse shall be provided. 
C.  Setbacks. All structures shall comply with the greater of 25 feet or the required setbacks of the applicable zoning district. 
D.  Groom's Quarters. Groom's quarters may be provided, subject to the Section 3.2.28. 
E.  Barns and Stables as Principal Structures. Within an RE10 or RE5 zoning district, a barn or stable and associated uses may be constructed as a principal structure. 
Section 3.2.35. - Grocery or Food Store. 
A grocery or food store shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Accessory Uses. Permitted accessory uses include bakeries, delicatessens, pharmacies, photo processing, and production of food for off-premises consumption. 
B.  Consumption on Premises. Consumption of food and beverages prepared on the premises is permitted, subject to Health Department and other applicable agency approvals. 
Section 3.2.36. - Hazardous Waste Disposal Facility. 
A hazardous waste facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Compliance. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws and standards. 
Section 3.2.37. - Helipad or helistop, Accessory. 
A helipad or helistop shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Activities. A helipad shall be permitted as an accessory use to banks and financial institutions, governmental buildings, hospitals, office buildings, public safety facilities and similar uses. 
B.  Prohibited Activities. Facilities for fueling, repair or long-term parking are prohibited. For the purposes of this Section, long term parking shall be shall be any period of time that includes overnight aircraft parking. 
C.  Compliance. A helipad shall comply with all applicable federal, state or City requirements. 
D.  Landing and Departure Routes. To the extent feasible, take off and landing routes shall avoid adjacent residential areas. The City may establish take off and landing routes as part of approval to establish an accessory helipad. 
Section 3.2.38. - Heliport. 
A heliport shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Activities. Enclosed or open facilities for fueling, repair or short- or long-term parking are permitted. 
B.  Compliance. A heliport shall comply with all applicable federal, state or City requirements. 
C.  Landing and Departure Routes. To the extent feasible, take off and landing routes shall avoid adjacent residential areas. The City may establish take off and landing routes as part of approval to establish a heliport. 
Section 3.2.39. - Home Occupations. 
A home occupation shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Additional Standards. In addition to any other requirements of this Code, home occupations are subject to the standards listed below. 
1.  Residence Required. Only lawful residents of a dwelling unit shall be engaged in the occupation. 
2.  Employees. Employees, other than residents or resident family members, are prohibited. 
3.  Nature of Use. The use of the premises for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants. 
4.  Residential Character. The use shall not change the residential character of the premises. 
5.  Outside Appearance. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation. 
6.  Location. Home occupations shall not be conducted in any attached or detached accessory building or structure, or any open porch or carport, which is part of the principal structure. 
7.  Maximum Size. A home occupation shall not occupy more than fifteen percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit, excluding any open porch, attached garage, or similar space not suited or intended for occupancy as living quarters. 
8.  Traffic and Parking. Traffic shall not be generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
9.  Vehicle Parking. Vehicle parking shall be located on the same lot or premises as the home occupation and shall be in character with the neighborhood. 
10.  Production and Storage of Goods. Manufacture or fabrication of articles such as are commonly classified under the terms of arts and handicrafts may be deemed a home occupation, subject to the other terms and conditions of this Section. 
11.  Storage of Materials and Equipment. All material, equipment, or supplies used in conjunction with a home occupation shall be completely enclosed with no exterior storage, temporary or permanent, allowed. Bulk storage of material, equipment or supplies is prohibited. 
B.  Prohibited Activities. 
1.  External Effects. Equipment or processes which create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at any lot line shall not be used in a home occupation. 
2.  Interference. Equipment or processes shall not be used which create any interference for neighboring properties in receiving radio, television, or other wireless devices, or which cause fluctuations in electrical service to such properties. 
3.  Hazardous Materials. On-premises use or storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. 
4.  Sale of Goods or Products. On-premises sales of stock, supplies, or product are prohibited. 
C.  Signs and Advertising. On-premises signs or other advertising of the address and location of a home occupation is prohibited. 
D.  Licenses. Owners or operators of home occupations shall obtain required City, state or federal occupational licenses, or other license necessary to operate such business. 
E.  Acknowledgement. Individuals requesting one or more home occupational licenses shall sign an affidavit furnished by the City that acknowledges their receipt of these regulations and other local regulations applicable to such licenses. 
F.  Number of Licenses. Not more than two occupational licenses shall be issued per individual residence. 
G.  Number of Students. Private instructions, limited to academic, artistic, and musical subjects, shall be limited to not more than two students at the same time. 
H.  Permitted Home Occupations. Home occupations permitted are the following: 
1.  Professional, business and technical offices; 
2.  Academic, artistic and musical lessons and training; 
3.  Arts and crafts consistent with the requirements of this Section; and 
4.  Other similar activities. 
I.  Prohibited Home Occupations. Home occupations not permitted include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Beauty shops; 
2.  Barber shops; 
3.  Hair cutting or styling shops, including shops with only one chair; 
4.  Nail salons or other beauty or cosmetic-related business, including shops with only one chair; 
5.  Tattoo parlors; 
6.  Pet grooming; 
7.  Repair of any type of equipment, electronic equipment, computers, motor vehicle, lawn mower, or similar types of machinery; 
8.  All services and activities, unless otherwise permitted by this Section, that depend upon or attract clients to the occupation conducted within the home. 
J.  Compliance and Inspections. To determine compliance with this Section, owners or operators of home occupations shall permit an inspection of the premises during normal business hours by the Department prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and at such other times deemed necessary. 
K.  Deliveries. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to delivery of parcels, documents, and similar items by licensed delivery firms. 
Section 3.2.40. - Hotel, Motel or Inn. 
A hotel, motel or inn shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Cooking Facilities. Cooking facilities are allowed only in extended stay facilities. 
B.  Conversion. Conversion of a hotel, motel or inn to a fulltime residential use shall comply with all applicable requirements of this UDO. 
C.  Hotels in the HIST Zoning District. Hotels, motels and inns in the HIST zoning district shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Accessory Sales and Services. Sales and services accessory to the operation of a hotel, conducted within the hotel are permitted, subject to the following: 
(A)  The gross floor area devoted to accessory sales and services shall be limited to a total of 25 gross square feet per room; 
(B)  All public entrances to an accessory use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion or area; 
(C)  A show window, advertising or display shall not be visible from the exterior of primary portion of a hotel or from any public right-of-way; and 
(D)  Merchandise associated with an accessory use shall not be stored or displayed outside any portion of a hotel. 
2.  Exception. Restaurants and cafeterias are exempt from limitations regarding number of square feet and location of public entrances. 
Section 3.2.41. - Junk, Salvage or Auto Wrecking Yard. 
A junk, salvage or auto wrecking yard shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Sale of Operable Vehicles Prohibited. The sale of operable vehicles is prohibited. 
B.  Opaque Wall Construction and Materials. 
1.  Maximum Height and Setback. An opaque wall shall be at least six feet in height. A wall shall be setback at least 20 feet from any corner right-of-way line. 
2.  Construction and Installation. An opaque wall shall be constructed of masonry, concrete or other similar permanent opaque materials so as to screen a yard and contents from public view. 
3.  Maintenance. Walls shall be maintained in good order, repair and appearance. 
4.  Outside Storage. Overnight, short-term or long-term storage of materials outside a fence is prohibited. 
C.  Fence Openings and Gates. 
1.  Openings. A wall opening in a salvage, disassembly or storage yard shall be utilized only for ingress and egress. 
2.  Gates. Gates shall be constructed to be opaque, as approved by the City, and shall be closed when not in use. 
D.  Living Fence or Wall. A "living fence or wall" may be substituted in lieu of an opaque wall, but shall utilize only the materials listed in Table 3.2.5. The Director, with the advice of the City Arborist, may approve use of additional materials. Entrance gates shall be required with a living fence, and shall comply with the requirements of an opaque wall. 
Table 3.2.5.  Permitted Plant Materials 

 
E.  Permitted Plant Materials. Permitted plant materials for a living fence are indicated in Table 3.2.5. Plant materials suitable for a living fence with expected height of plants for eight to ten feet high in three years. 
F.  Maintenance and Replacement. 
1.  Maintenance. All plant materials shall be maintained in good health, and shall be watered, fertilized and otherwise maintained consistent with accepted horticultural practices. 
2.  Replacement. All plant materials that die, become diseased or otherwise fail to provide the necessary opacity shall be replaced on a timely basis. 
G.  Compliance. 
1.  New Walls or Fences. Walls or fences erected after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
H.  Existing Fences. Businesses with existing walls or fences shall be maintained as approved by the City. 
Section 3.2.42. - Kennel, Boarding or Breeding. 
A breeding or boarding kennel shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Minimum Lot Size. A kennel shall be located on not less than five acres of land. 
B.  Minimum Setbacks. 
1.  Open Runs. A kennel with open runs shall be set back at least 250 feet from any property line. 
2.  Enclosed Runs. A kennel with enclosed runs shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line. 
Section 3.2.43. - Laundry, Coin Operated. 
A coin-operated laundry shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Hours of Operation. Any laundry located within a NC zoning district shall not be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
Section 3.2.44. - Manufactured Dwelling. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide for the following: 
1.  Installation of manufactured housing in residential zoning districts as provided by applicable federal and state laws; 
2.  Installation standards for manufactured housing in applicable residential zoning districts; and 
3.  Use of basic design standards to provide compatibility between manufactured housing and housing styles within the community or area in which the unit is to be located. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the definitions listed below shall apply. 
1.  Manufactured Housing means a single-family dwelling unit, constructed after June 15, 1976 pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, The National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, and is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human habitation. The dwelling unit is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other devices allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site and does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to it body or frame. 
2.  Mobile Home means a single-family dwelling unit, constructed prior to June 15, 1976, that is a transportable structure suitable for year-round single-family occupancy and having water, electrical and sewer connections similar to those of conventional housing. 
C.  Principal Use. The unit shall be the only habitable structure upon the lot on which it is installed. 
D.  Permitted Locations. Manufactured housing shall be permitted in locations as provided by Table 3.1.1. 
E.  Certification. The unit shall be labeled or possess documents certifying construction in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act. 
F.  Installation and Design Standards. The design and installation of all manufactured housing in any residential zoning district, excluding a mobile home park, shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Placement. The unit shall be located so that its longer dimension is parallel to the street upon which the lot fronts. 
2.  Transportation Apparatus. The wheels, axles, tongue, towing apparatus, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to final installation of the unit. 
3.  Foundation Required. The unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation consisting of masonry or concrete and constructed to all applicable building code standards. 
4.  Foundation Screening. A skirting or a curtain wall shall be installed and maintained to enclose the entire foundation area and all area below the bottom of a unit. 
(A)  Appearance. The skirting or curtain wall must be a continuous, complete, opaque and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the unit and completely screens the crawl space below the unit. 
(B)  Access. The skirting or curtain wall shall not be open except for required ventilation and access doors. Unless required by the building code, access shall not be located along the front building line of the unit or any portion of a unit that possesses frontage on a public or private street. 
(C)  Materials. The skirting or curtain wall shall consist of brick, stucco or similar material consistent with surrounding residences and the community. Materials shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
(D)  Maintenance. The skirting or curtain wall shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 
5.  Compliance with Applicable Building Code Standards. All improvements and installations shall comply with applicable building codes, including but not limited to the following: 
(A)  Crawl spaces; 
(B)  Steps, handrails, and landings; 
(C)  Electrical service; 
(D)  Plumbing and sewer service; 
(E)  Natural gas service; and 
(F)  Heating, ventilation and air conditioning service. 
6.  Roof Design. 
(A)  Pitch. The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2.5 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(B)  Eaves. The roof shall have eaves that project a minimum of 12 inches from the exterior wall. 
(C)  Materials. Roof materials shall be consistent with surrounding residences. 
7.  Architecture. The unit shall consistent with architectural style of surrounding homes in the community. 
8.  Size. The unit shall be consistent with the number of square feet of surrounding homes. 
9.  Windows. Installation of full size windows consistent with surrounding residences. 
10.  Exterior Materials. Exterior materials shall be consistent with surrounding residences. 
11.  Carports and Garages. Installation of a carport or garage may be required if either structure is a consistent or uniform element of surrounding residences and the community. The garage shall be constructed with a garage door. 
12.  Landscaping. Manufactured homes shall comply with all applicable landscaping requirements of this Code. 
Section 3.2.45. - Massage Therapy. 
A therapeutic massage establishment shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Certification. Massage therapists shall have successfully completed the National Certification Examination. 
B.  Licensure and Operation. Massage therapists shall be licensed with and operate the business in accordance with the requirements of one of the following: 
1.  The Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges of Technology; 
2.  The Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training 
3.  The Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools; 
4.  National Accrediting Commission of Cosmetology Arts and Sciences; 
5.  The Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation of the American Massage Therapy Association; or 
6.  The Integrative Massage and Somatic Therapies Accreditation Council of the Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals. 
C.  Compliance. A therapeutic massage establishment shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the City code and this UDO. 
Section 3.2.46. - Office, Veterinary. 
A veterinary office shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Outdoor Runs and Boarding Facilities Prohibited. In all nonresidential zoning districts, outdoor runs and boarding facilities are prohibited. 
B.  Indoor Runs. In all nonresidential zoning districts, indoor runs and boarding facilities shall be soundproofed to eliminate at any adjacent residential property line all noise associated with the boarding of animals. 
C.  Overnight Boarding. Overnight boarding is permitted in those facilities with indoor runs. 
Section 3.2.47. - Outdoor Cafe, Public Property. 
An outdoor cafe and seating may be located on public property within the CRD zoning district as provided in Article 2 of Chapter 4. 
Section 3.2.48. - Outdoor Cafe, Private Property. 
An outdoor cafe and seating may be located accessory to or in conjunction with a restaurant, clubhouse or similar facility, but shall not be located on public property. 
Section 3.2.49. - Package and Liquor Store. 
A package and liquor store shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Hours of Operation. A store shall comply with hours of operation established by the City. 
B.  Consumption on Premises. Consumption on premises of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, unless the store possesses a license that allows such consumption. 
Section 3.2.50. - Personal Care Home, Type I. 
A Type I personal care home shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Number of Residents. Personal care shall be provided for not more than six residents. 
B.  Character of Dwelling. The character of the dwelling shall conform to the neighborhood and zoning district in which the facility is located. 
C.  Signs in Single-family Zoning Districts. Installation of signs in a single-family zoning district comply with the standards of Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
D.  Compliance. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
E.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 14-19, § 5, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 19-017, § 2, 4-9-19) 
Section 3.2.51. - Personal Care Home, Type II. 
A Type II personal care home shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Number of Residents. Personal care shall be provided for not less than 7 or not more than 15 residents. 
B.  Character of Dwelling. The character of the dwelling shall conform to the neighborhood and zoning district in which the facility is located. 
C.  Signs. Signs shall comply with the requirements of Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
D.  Compliance. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-017, § 3, 4-9-19) 
Section 3.2.52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-017, § 4, adopted April 9, 2019, repealed § 3.5.52, which pertained to Personal Care Home, Type III and derived from the Original Code. 
Section 3.2.53. - Places of Worship. 
Places of worship shall comply with the standards of this Section. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the standards of this Section is to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses, especially those uses established within residential zoning districts. 
B.  Cumulative Impacts. For the purposes of this Section, any expansion of any existing place of worship that results in more than 250 seats shall be reviewed as a special exception use. The Council may waive the requirement of this Section for primary vehicular access for an existing place of worship. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Permitted Use. A place of worship with less than 250 permanent seats or approved capacity may be located as a permitted use as provided in Section 3.1.1. 
2.  Special Exception Use. 
(A)  A place of worship with 250 or more permanent seats or approved capacity may be located as a special exception use as provided in Section 3.1.1. 
(B)  A place of worship located on property that is less than two acres but greater than one acre may be located as a special exception use as provided in Section 3.1.1. 
D.  Associated Uses. Typical uses associated with a place of worship include the following: 
1.  Sanctuaries, assembly halls, or similar large meeting rooms where religious services are held; 
2.  Community centers or fellowship halls, which may be the site of religious services, but also used for community, athletic, fraternal, social, civic, charitable and recreational programs; 
3.  Offices utilized for administrative purposes related to the operation of the church or place of worship; 
4.  Accessory retail facilities for the sale of religious merchandise or merchandise related to the operation of the house of worship; 
5.  Playgrounds and athletic fields; and 
6.  Rectory or similar residence for religious officials, limited to one per place of worship. 
E.  Special Exception Uses Associated with a Place of Worship. As part of a special exception use to establish a place of worship or as part of an existing place of worship, the following associated uses may be approved as a special exception use: 
1.  School, elementary or secondary; 
2.  Day care, child or adult; 
3.  Personal care facility, Type III; and 
4.  Monastery or convent. 
F.  Additional Standards. Additional standards applicable to a place of worship are provided below. 
1.  Grass Parking. Not more than 50 percent of required parking may be grassed consistent with Section 4.3.5. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size. Minimum lot size for a freestanding place of worship is two acres, unless said lot size qualifies as a special exception use per Section 3.2.53.C.2. 
3.  Primary Vehicular Access. 
(A)  More than 250 Seats. A place of worship with more than 250 seats or approved capacity shall be located on and provide primary vehicular access from a collector or arterial roadways. 
(B)  Associated Uses. All day care centers, elementary or secondary schools, monasteries or convents, or personal care facilities shall provide primary vehicular access from the following roadways: city collector, minor arterial, state minor arterial, state, or state principal arterial. 
4.  Exterior Illumination and Lighting. Exterior illumination and lighting for athletic fields, parking lots, and security shall be shielded from adjacent residential zoning districts and shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.2.2. 
5.  Temporary Uses or Special Events. Temporary uses or special events such as outside religious services, seasonal sales, seasonal displays, or other events of a limited nature may require a special events permit or approval as required in Section 3.2.63 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-44, § 1, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 08-57, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Section 3.2.54. - Railroad Yard. 
A railroad yard shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Activities. Permitted activities include the assembly, classification, consolidation, distribution, moving, repair, storage, switching, transfer and weighing of cars, engines, locomotives, trains and rolling stock. 
Section 3.2.55. - Recreational Vehicle Park. 
A recreational vehicle park (RVP) shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Property Site and Property Development Regulations. Minimum property development standards for a RVP are established below. 
1.  Minimum Size. Minimum size for a RVP shall be ten acres. 
2.  Maximum Density. Maximum density shall be ten recreational vehicles per acre, based upon total number of acres in development. 
3.  Minimum Property Development Regulations. Minimum property development regulations are provided in Table 3.2.6. 
Table 3.2.6.  Minimum Property Development Regulations 

 
4.  Minimum Parking. Minimum parking requirements are provided in Table 3.2.7. 
Table 3.2.7.  Minimum Parking Requirements 

 
5.  Minimum Setbacks. All principal and accessory structures and recreational vehicle spaces shall be setback at least 50 feet from any property line. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Permitted accessory uses include those listed below. 
1.  Recreational Amenities. Recreation amenities, restricted to use by guests, including pools, tennis and shuffleboard courts, recreation rooms, equestrian facilities, fishing, nature and walking trails, play grounds, tot lots, docks, and similar facilities. 
2.  Security. Gatehouses or similar facilities designed to provide security to the RVP. 
3.  Other Accessory Uses. Other permitted accessory uses are indicated below: 
(A)  Maintenance facilities; 
(B)  Administrative office space necessary for operation of the RVP; and 
(C)  Commercial or retail use, restricted to use by guests, including convenience food and beverage items and recreational vehicle parts. 
C.  Prohibited Uses. The uses, activities, or improvements listed below are prohibited within a RVP. 
1.  Permanent Residential Use. Permanent residential use of any RVP land, structure, or facility is prohibited, excluding occupants of any security quarters that may be established in the RVP. 
2.  Permanent Structures Accessory to a Recreational Vehicle. The installation or construction permanent structures or additions accessory to a recreational vehicle, including but not limited to screen rooms, carports, and utility sheds. 
3.  Parking. Parking of recreational vehicles in areas not designated for such use. 
4.  Storage. The storage of recreational vehicles. 
5.  Excessive Residential Use. Residence in any recreational vehicle space within a park the is restricted to 90 consecutive days, and not more than 180 calendar days during any one year period. 
D.  Records. The owner or operator of an RVP shall maintain the following records: 
1.  The names and permanent addresses of the occupants of recreational vehicles; 
2.  The dates of occupancy for each recreational vehicle used by guests within the RVP; and 
3.  The year, make, model; and license plate of each recreational vehicle or automobile used by RVP guests. 
E.  Security Quarters. A single-family dwelling, excluding a mobile home, may be established to provide a residence for full-time security personnel residing on the premises. 
F.  Vehicular Access. An arterial or collector roadway shall provide vehicular access to a RVP. Access to a RVP through property possessing a residential future land use plan or zoning designation is prohibited. 
G.  Pedestrian Access. The RVP shall incorporate a continuous pedestrian and bicycle pathway throughout the entire area of the site, including connections to all portions of the RVP facility, all internal roads, all exterior vehicular connections, and uses and amenities installed for use by guests. 
H.  Sanitary Facilities. 
1.  Central Facilities Required. Centralized sanitary facilities, including bathing, toilets, and sinks, shall be provided. The number and location of such facilities shall be adequate for the number of visitors to the park. 
2.  Water and Sewer Service. Unless otherwise authorized by the Health Department, each RVP parking stall, central bathing facility, administrative office, maintenance facility, security quarters, or any other similar use shall provide a connection to central water and wastewater treatment facilities. 
Section 3.2.56. - Schools, Private. 
A private school shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Compliance with Unified Development Ordinance. Any private school shall comply with all applicable requirements of this UDO, including flood prevention; land clearing; landscaping; property development regulations including setbacks and building height; protection of environmental resources; signage; soil erosion and sedimentation; and tree preservation. 
B.  Method of Approval. All private schools shall be reviewed as a special exception use. 
Section 3.2.57. - Schools, Vocational and Nonacademic. 
Vocational and nonacademic schools shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Heavy Equipment Training. Schools providing training for the use of heavy equipment, including semi-trucks, construction vehicles, buses or similar types of vehicles is permitted only in the LMI, HMI and TECH zoning districts. 
B.  Driving and Training Courses. All elements comprising a driving and training course for heavy equipment training, including driving courses, exits, entries, buildings, vehicle parking and storage areas and lighting shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any residential zoning district. 
C.  Exemption. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to any vocational or non-academic school that is operated by the State of Georgia, the Muscogee County School District, or the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(Ord. No. 08-44, § 1, 9-19-08) 
Section 3.2.58. - Self Service Storage. 
A self-service storage facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Design. 
1.  Number of Stories. The facility may be single or multistory. 
2.  Design and Style. A multistory facility shall be designed and constructed in a manner that avoids uninterrupted rooflines, large expanses of blank walls and similar monotonous features. Design features to be considered include exterior materials; roof materials; primary and trim colors; and exterior features such as real or simulated doors or windows, alternating use of contrasting materials, vertical or horizontal members and similar features to avoid large expanses of blank wall. 
B.  Access. The facilities may offer access via a limited number of access points or via a large number of doors or access points to individual bays. 
C.  Security Quarters. Facilities may include one permanent residential security quarters utilized by the owner, agent or employee of the owner. 
D.  General Standards. 
1.  Maximum Size. Individual storage areas shall not exceed 250 square feet. 
2.  Boats and Recreational Vehicles. 
(A)  Storage of boats and recreational vehicles is permitted. 
(B)  Boats shall be stored on trailers with wheels. 
(C)  Storage areas shall be completely screened from public rights-of-way or adjacent residential zoning districts, utilizing either the buildings associated with the storage facility or by an opaque masonry wall, or equivalent approved by the City, at least six feet in height. 
Section 3.2.59. - Shelter, Homeless. 
A homeless shelter shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Sanitary Facilities. Shower and restroom facilities shall be provided to serve the number of overnight guests, consistent with the requirements of applicable state or local law. 
B.  Sleeping Facilities. One bed per client, excluding staff and volunteers, shall be provided. 
C.  Capacity. The capacity of homeless shelters shall not exceed 50 residents. 
D.  Departure. Occupants must leave no later than 7:00 a.m. each morning and shall not be allowed to occupy the facility until 5:00 p.m. each evening. 
E.  Loitering. Loitering of occupants around the facility between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. is prohibited. 
Section 3.2.60. - Shelter, Temporary. 
A temporary shelter shall comply with the standards applicable to Personal Care Homes, Types I, II and III as established in Sections 3.2.51, 52 and 53. 
Section 3.2.61. - Telecommunications and Digital Exchange. 
A telecommunications and digital exchange shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Ground Floor Commercial Uses. If located in a commercial zoning district, the Director may require retention or installation of ground floor commercial or retail uses to maintain or encourage area character. 
1.  Extent of Commercial Uses. Commercial uses shall be provided along the entire ground floor of a structure that fronts a public or private right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
2.  Depth of Commercial Use. The commercial use shall extend at least 50 feet from any building facade fronting a right-of-way. 
B.  Appearance. If located in a commercial zoning district possessing a commercial or pedestrian orientation or character, the Director may require retention or installation of architectural features consistent with such orientation or character. Required architectural features may include but are not limited to exterior materials, roof materials, building colors and trim, windows, protected pedestrian walkways such as canopies or arcades, cornices, moldings and low relief carvings. 
Section 3.2.62. - Temporary Building or Structure. 
Temporary building or structure shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Accessory Use. The building or structure shall be accessory or incidental to an active residential or nonresidential construction project. 
B.  Approval. Approval of the Director must be issued in writing prior to the installation of a temporary building. 
C.  Compliance with Building and Health Codes. A temporary building shall comply with all applicable building and public health codes, including connection to sanitary sewer and potable water services if required. 
D.  Duration of Approval. The temporary building shall be removed upon completion of construction, or two years, whichever is greater. The Director may extend approval for the temporary building for not more than 18 months. 
Section 3.2.63. - Temporary Use or Special Event. 
A temporary use or special event shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Review. Unless otherwise provided herein, the City Manager may approve an application for a temporary use or special event. An event that occurs for five or more days, and includes but is not limited to outdoor festivals, craft shows, carnivals and similar outdoor amusements, flea markets, plant sales, parades on public rights-of-way, seasonal sales of merchandise, concerts, and any similar other event. 
B.  Location. A temporary use or special event shall be located as provided below: 
1.  Properties possessing a nonresidential zoning district designations; or 
2.  Properties within residential zoning districts or residential portions of PUDs that are public-serving sites such as public or private schools, places of worship public parks or other public property. 
C.  Duration. An event shall not exceed seven consecutive days. The City Manager may authorize one administrative time extension of up to three days. The Council shall approve any event more than ten days in length. 
1.  Exemption. The following events shall be exempt from the ten day limitation. 
(A)  Community Fairs. Community fairs shall not exceed 14 days of operation and being open to the public, excluding time to set up or dismantle the fair. 
(B)  Religious Meetings. Religious meetings of a temporary nature shall not exceed 14 days in length, excluding time to set up or dismantle the meeting facilities. 
(C)  Christmas Trees Sales. Christmas tree sales shall be permitted starting the weekend prior to Thanksgiving and continuing until January 1. 
(D)  Pumpkin Sales. Pumpkin sales shall be permitted thirty (30) days prior to October 31. 
(E)  Fireworks Sales. Fireworks sales shall be permitted for the following: 
1)  Independence Day. Fireworks sales shall be permitted thirty (30) days prior to July 4. 
2)  New Year's Day. Fireworks sales shall be permitted thirty (30) days prior to January 1. 
D.  Number per Year. Not more than three temporary events in any calendar year shall be held on the same location, unless otherwise approved by the Council following a recommendation by the City Manager. 
E.  Compliance. If a violation occurs at an event permitted by the City, the City Manager may deny permits to the operator for similar temporary events for a period of not more than 18 months. 
F.  Review. The City Manager may require review of a temporary event permit by members of City staff. 
G.  General Standards. Temporary uses or special events shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Access. Vehicular access from a collector or arterial roadway shall be provided. Access from a local street is prohibited, unless approved by City Manager as the only feasible access available to a site. 
2.  Setbacks. The minimum setbacks indicated in Table 3.2.9 shall apply to all parking areas, mobile homes or similar temporary dwellings or offices, tents, mechanical devices, carnival rides, and animals associated with such activities. 
Table 3.2.9.  Minimum Setbacks for Special Events 

 
3.  Traffic Control. Use of city police or acceptable alternative to direct and control traffic may be required. 
4.  Sanitation and Public Health. Plans for sanitation and public health protection including temporary bathroom facilities, inspection of food facilities, drainage, and garbage and litter control, shall be approved by the City Manager. 
5.  Application Requirements. Applications for a temporary use or special event authorization shall be submitted to the Director of Inspections and Codes. 
(A)  Submittal. Applications shall be filed at least 5 days prior to the opening day of the use or event. 
(B)  Contents. The application shall contain such information as required by the Director of Inspections and Codes, and shall include the items listed below. 
(1)  Authority. Evidence the property owner authorizes the use of the site for a special event. 
(2)  Site Plan. A general site plan for the event, including property boundaries, road access, location of tents or other structures, location of rides, location of parking, location of temporary dwellings or offices, and proposed setbacks of activities, tents, booths, etc., from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Statement of Use. A general statement of use, including but not limited to sponsor, planned activities, duration of event, hours of operation, anticipated attendance, temporary lighting to be provided onsite, security, utilities, use of generators, and other information that may be required by the Director. 
(4)  Signs. A general sign plan, including proposed number, size, location, and dates of installation and removal of all signs associated with the event. 
(5)  Other Materials. Other materials and documentation as may be required by the Director. 
6.  Surety. The City Manager may require the operator of an event to post a cash surety, or other form of security, to provide funds to cleanup or otherwise mitigate a site following a temporary event. The Manager shall approve the amount of surety. 
7.  Insurance. The City Manager may require the operator of an event to provide evidence of a general liability policy in an amount of at least $1,000,000, with the City named as an additional insured. The City may require proof of additional insurance. 
8.  Authorization. The City Manager shall issue written approval for a temporary use or special event, including any conditions or restrictions placed on the proposed activities. Conditions or restrictions may affect or include planned activities, duration of event, hours of operation, temporary lighting to be provided onsite, security, traffic control, garbage and litter control, bathroom facilities, utilities, security, and use of generators. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, § 1, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 3.2.64. - Tire Retreading and Recapping. 
A tire retreading and recapping facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Storage. Used tires may be stored onsite for ultimate processing or disposal. 
B.  Disposal. Disposal of used tires shall comply with applicable federal, state or local requirements. 
Section 3.2.65. - Towing Services. 
A towing service shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Prohibited Activities. A towing service shall not engage in the disassembly, repair, salvage or long-term storage of vehicles. For the purposes of this Section, long-term storage of vehicles shall be defined as storage of vehicles for more than 90 days. 
B.  Exempt Activities. Auto repair services or auto service stations providing a towing service may repair towed vehicles. 
Section 3.2.66. - Transitional Housing Facility, Type I. 
A Type I Transitional Housing Facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Definition. For the purposes of this Section, a Type I Transitional Housing Facility is defined as group housing for individuals and juveniles undergoing some form treatment, therapy, medical care, counseling, guidance or other assistance for current or former use and abuse of addictive or controlled substances, including legal or illegal drugs and chemicals, alcohol, tobacco, any similar substance, any other chemical or substance, or any combination thereof. 
B.  Control and Operation. Type I facilities shall be controlled and operated by one of the following: 
1.  Public agencies of federal, state or local government. 
2.  Private, for-profit firms or organizations that operate on behalf of and under contract with an agency of federal, state or local government; and 
3.  Not-for-profit agencies that provide service to current or former substance abusers. 
C.  Exemption. The standards of this Section shall not apply to any Type I facility operated by Muscogee County. 
D.  Maximum Capacity and Nature of Residents. 
1.  Single-family and Historic Residential Zoning Districts. In any single-family residential or historic zoning district, maximum capacity shall not exceed 6 residents, excluding staff associated with the facility. 
2.  Multiple Family Residential Zoning Districts. In any multiple family residential zoning district, maximum capacity shall not exceed 15 residents, excluding staff associated with the facility. 
3.  Nature of Residents. Residents of a Type I facility located in a single-family or multifamily residential zoning district shall not be classified as a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
4.  Sixteen or More Residents. A Type I facility with 16 or more residents shall only be located within a nonresidential zoning district. 
E.  Character of Facility. In a single-family or multifamily residential zoning district, the character of the structure shall conform to the neighborhood in which the facility is located. 
F.  Signs in Single-family Zoning Districts. Installation of signs is prohibited in a single-family or historic zoning district. 
G.  Minimum Separation Distance. At least 1,000 feet shall separate Type I transitional housing facilities located within a single-family or historic residential zoning district. 
1.  Measurement of Distance. The separation distance shall be measured in a direct line from the closest property line of one facility to the closest property line of the other facility. 
2.  Variance or Waiver Prohibited. A variance or waiver to the required separation distance shall not be granted. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 3.2.67. - Transitional Housing Facility, Type II. 
A Type II Transitional Housing Facility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Definition. For the purposes of this Section, a Type II Transitional Housing Facility is defined as group housing for individuals and juveniles that are under some form of judicial or correctional control, direction, guidance or counseling, including but not limited to the following categories: 
1.  Work release programs for current or former convicts; 
2.  Alternative incarceration or correctional programs; 
3.  Halfway housing; 
4.  Pre-release programs; 
5.  Pre-sentencing programs; or 
6.  Any similar type of traditional or non-traditional incarceration or control program. 
B.  Locations. The closest portion of the structure shall be located at least 500 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
C.  Control and Operation. Type II facilities shall be controlled and operated by an agency of federal, state or local government. A Type II facility may include private facilities that are controlled and operated on behalf of and under contract with an agency of federal, state or local government. 
D.  Maximum Capacity. The maximum capacity for a Type II facility shall be 25 residents. 
E.  Exemption. The standards of this Section shall not apply to any Type II facility operated by Muscogee County. 
F.  General Procedures. All Type II facilities shall comply with the general procedures established below. 
1.  Identification of Residents. The staff of each facility shall maintain an up-to-date roster of all clients or residents. The roster shall be provided in a timely fashion, upon request, to the Chief of Police. 
2.  Staff. Each facility shall maintain an appropriate level of staff on an 24 hour a day basis. The appropriate level of staff shall be determined in coordination with the staff of the sponsoring agency, the Planning Division and the Chief of Police. 
3.  Emergency Contacts. Each staff of each facility shall provide the Chief of Police with a list of contacts in case of emergency. The staff of each facility shall be responsible for maintaining the list on a current basis. 
4.  Security. The sponsoring agency for each facility shall provide security fencing, and other security or screening and buffering measures, as may be required by the Chief of Police or the Planning Division. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 3.2.68. - Upholstery Shop. 
An upholstery shop shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Prohibited Repairs. Repairs to automobile upholstery are prohibited, unless allowed in the zoning district in which the shop is located. 
Section 3.2.69. - Utility, Major. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses within a major utility include the following: utility distribution, collection, or transmission networks or facilities operated by a public or private agency or organization that provides utility services to a regional or subregional geographic area. 
Section 3.2.70. - Utility, Minor. 
A minor utility shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses within a minor utility include the following: underground water and sanitary sewer lines; overhead or underground electrical, gas, cable, and telephone lines, including necessary service boxes; lighting and utility poles; sewage lift stations; electrical distribution substations; and manned or unmanned telephone exchange buildings, buildings with telephone switching equipment, and substations. 
Section 3.2.71. - Utility Plant. 
A utility plant shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Review of Application. An application to establish a utility plant shall be reviewed as a special exception use. 
B.  Exemption. Any utility plant operated by a public agency under the control of federal, state or local government is exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
C.  Additional Impacts to be Considered. In addition to the standards of Article 2 of Chapter 10 regarding special exception use applications, the following impacts shall be considered as part of any application for approval of a utility plant. 
1.  Natural Resources. Impact on natural resources, including environmentally sensitive lands, aquifer and groundwater recharge areas, flood plains, protected rivers, and similar areas. 
2.  Water Resources. Impact of plant operations on surface and subsurface water resources, including amount of water to be withdrawn or utilized on a regular basis. 
3.  Air Quality Resources. Impact of plant operations on air quality resources of the Columbus Phenix City Transportation Study/Metropolitan Planning Organization area. 
4.  Community Character. The impact of the plant and its operations on community character, including the following: 
(A)  The nature and type of adjacent land uses; 
(B)  The bulk, scale and size of the plant in relation to adjacent uses; and 
(C)  The impact of lighting, emissions, traffic, number of employees, and overall operational characteristics. 
Section 3.2.72. - Wireless Communications Facilities. 
Wireless communications facilities shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Definitions. Definitions relating to wireless communications are provided in Chapter 13. 
B.  Exemptions. Wireless communications facilities for which a permit was issued prior to the effective date of these regulations are not required to meet the standards listed below. 
1.  Less than 70 Feet in Height. Antennae and towers less than 70 feet in height, owned and operated by the holder of an amateur radio license issued by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
2.  Certain Personal Devices. Personal over-the-air devices for video programming and wireless Internet services are not subject to the requirements of this Section. 
3.  Ground Relay Stations. Satellite ground relay stations facilities are not subject to the requirements of this Section. 
4.  Satellite Dish Antenna. Satellite dish antennas, or similar devices, as provided in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, are exempt from the requirements of this Section, subject to the standards listed below. 
(A)  Residential Zoning Districts. 
(1)  The satellite dish shall not exceed 39 inches or one meter in diameter. 
(2)  The satellite dish will be installed in compliance with all required building setbacks. 
(3)  The satellite dish will be installed in compliance with the height requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
(B)  Nonresidential Zoning Districts. 
(1)  The satellite dish shall not exceed 78 inches or two meters in diameter. 
(2)  The satellite dish will be installed in compliance with all required building setbacks. 
(3)  The satellite dish will be installed in compliance with the height requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
C.  Principal or Accessory Use. Antennae, towers and concealed support structures may be either a principal use or an accessory use and may be located on a non-conforming lot or on a lot containing a nonconforming use. The construction of a tower or concealed support structure in compliance with this Section shall not be considered an expansion of a nonconforming use. 
D.  Approval Required. A wireless communications facility located on private property shall not be constructed unless it has first been approved as determined by Table 3.2.10. 
E.  Prohibited Locations. An antenna, tower or concealed support structure shall not be located on a lot platted or used for single-family residential purposes. In the residential zoning districts, an antenna, tower or concealed support structure may only be located on a property approved for non-single-family residential use, such as a multifamily development, a church or school. 
F.  Temporary Wireless Communication Facility. A Temporary Wireless Communication Facility (COW) may be approved by administrative review in any zoning district for a period not to exceed 90 days. The application shall include an explanation of the urgency of need for a temporary facility in addition to all other documentation requirements. 
Table 3.2.10.  Required Development Review for Towers 

 
G.  Review Criteria. In addition to the standards enumerated for administrative review or special exception use approval, the following factors shall also be considered: 
1.  Height. Height of the proposed Tower or Concealed Support Structure. 
2.  Residential Uses. Proximity of residential uses. 
3.  Topography. Topography of the surrounding area. 
4.  Vegetation. Surrounding tree cover and existing vegetation. 
5.  Architectural Design. Design of the structure with particular reference to characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
6.  Existing or Approved Towers. Whether there exist or have been approved other suitable towers or tall structures within the geographic area required to comply with the proposed service provider's engineering requirements. The lack of suitable alternatives may be demonstrated by one or more of the standards listed below. 
(A)  That existing towers or tall structures are not located within the necessary geographic area. 
(B)  That existing towers or tall structures are not of sufficient height to meet system engineering requirements. 
(C)  That existing towers or tall structures do not have the structural capacity to support the service provider's antennae or do not have sufficient ground or interior space for related equipment. 
(D)  That the proposed service provider's antennae would cause interference with antennae on existing towers or tall structures or that existing systems would cause interference with the proposed service provider's signal. 
(E)  That other limiting factors, not including economic considerations, render existing towers or tall structures unsuitable. 
H.  Denial. Any decision by the Inspection and Codes Division, Planning Division, Board of Historic and Architectural Review or City Council to deny an application to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and cite the basis on substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
I.  Height Limitations and Collocation Requirements. The standards listed below shall apply to all towers. 
1.  Maximum Height Increase. Antennae attached to existing buildings or structures other than towers shall not increase the total height by more than 20 feet. 
2.  Maximum Tower Height. Maximum tower height is indicated in Table 3.2.11. 
J.  Collocation. All towers over 100 feet in height shall have structural capacity and ground or interior space to accommodate multiple users. Towers up to 160 feet shall accommodate at least three users. Towers over 160 feet shall accommodate at least five users. 
Table 3.2.11.  Maximum Tower Height 

 
K.  Design Criteria. 
1.  Setbacks . 
(A)  A monopole tower structure shall be placed no closer than a distance equal to the height of the tower structure from any off-site residential structure. All other types of tower structures shall not be placed within 300 feet of a residential structure. 
(B)  All towers shall be located at least one-third of its height from any public right-of-way, unless it is a concealed support structure designed for small cell technology. 
(C)  Setbacks shall be based on the entire lot on which the tower is located and shall not be applied to any lease area within the host parcel. 
(D)  Towers and accessory structures or anchors in conjunction with a tower shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
2.  Landscaping and Screening. Standards for landscaping and screening towers are listed below. 
(A)  Towers and related equipment shall be surrounded by a minimum 10 foot wide area meeting buffer standards that is consistent with the requirements of Article 5 of Chapter 4 of this UDO. 
(B)  Landscaping and buffer areas must be under the ownership or long-term lease of the tower owner. 
(C)  The required buffer area may be reduced or waived by the City Council if, in the opinion of the City Arborist, existing natural vegetation provides sufficient screening from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
3.  Concealed Support Structures. Concealed support structures shall have all related equipment screened from view by one of the methods listed below. 
(A)  Existing Buildings. Locating all equipment in an existing building. 
(B)  Underground Vaults. Locating all equipment in an underground vault. 
(C)  New Structures. Locating all equipment in a new building that is of an architectural style similar to existing buildings or compatible with the specific environment. 
4.  Lighting. 
(A)  Security lighting is allowed to the extent that the light source is shielded from adjacent properties. 
(B)  Towers shall not be lighted beyond the standards required by the FAA. If lighting is required on a tower located within 1 mile of a residential use, the owner shall request FAA approval of a dual-lighting system. 
5.  Security. 
(A)  All towers and related equipment shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height. 
(B)  All towers shall be equipped with other anti-climbing devices as appropriate to prevent unauthorized access. 
L.  Signage and Advertising. Tower facilities shall have mounted in a conspicuous place, a sign of not more than one square foot in area, identifying the facility's owner and providing a means of contact in the event of an emergency. All other signs and any form of advertising are prohibited. Warning signs shall be provided as indicated below. 
1.  High Voltage. "HIGH VOLTAGE—DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure and spaced not more than 40 feet apart. 
2.  No Trespassing. "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure, and spaced not more than 40 feet apart. 
3.  Lettering. The height of the lettering of the warning signs shall be at least 12 inches. The warning signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade. 
4.  Alternative Attachment. The warning signs may be attached to freestanding poles if landscaping may obstruct the content of the signs. 
M.  Compliance. All towers, concealed support structures, antennae and related equipment shall comply with the following: 
1.  All building and electrical codes currently in force; 
2.  The noise requirements of this Code or as otherwise provided by Columbus; 
3.  The applicable standards of the Electronic Industries Association; and 
4.  The applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration. 
N.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Administrative Review and BHAR Review. In addition to all documentation required by these regulations for Administrative Review and BHAR review, applicants shall also submit the information listed below. 
(A)  Statement of Commitment. A statement of commitment to use the proposed site from at least one federally licensed wireless service provider. 
(B)  Materials. Narrative and graphic materials, such as signal propagation plots, prepared by a radio frequency engineer clearly explaining and illustrating the proposed service provider's need for the new antenna installation. In documenting need, the applicant will address the following: 
(1)  Existing towers and tall structures located within 3,000 feet of the proposed location; 
(2)  The required antenna height; and 
(3)  Alternate locations as may be appropriate. 
(C)  Engineering Report. For towers or concealed support structures, a report from a qualified independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia documenting the following: 
(1)  The location of the facility by longitude and latitude and Georgia Plane Coordinate System; 
(2)  Ground elevation and total height in English and metric measurements; 
(3)  Total anticipated capacity of the tower or concealed support structure, including assumptions as to number and type of antennae supported; 
(4)  Evidence of the structural integrity of the structure with respect to wind and ice loading; and 
(5)  Design characteristics that indicate the limits of falling debris in the event of catastrophic structural failure. 
(D)  Renderings. Architectural renderings or simulated photographs of all proposed structures in context with particular attention to views from public streets or residential uses. 
(E)  Contact or Agent. Identity and current contact information of the person authorized by the applicant to answer questions from the local government or community regarding construction and operation of the facility. Include name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
2.  Special Exception Use Approval. In addition to other application requirements of this Code, all applicants for special exception use approval shall submit the information listed below. 
(A)  Commitment. A written statement of commitment to use the proposed site from at least one federally licensed wireless service provider. 
(B)  Materials. Narrative and graphic materials, such as signal propagation plots, prepared by a radio frequency engineer clearly explaining and illustrating the proposed service provider's need for the new antenna installation. In documenting need, the applicant will address the following: 
(1)  The proposed site's relationship to the existing antenna network, existing towers and tall structures located within 3,000 feet of the proposed location; 
(2)  The required antenna height; and 
(3)  Alternate locations as may be appropriate. 
(C)  Structural Renderings. Architectural renderings or simulated photographs of all proposed structures in their physical environment with particular attention to views from public streets or residential uses. 
(D)  Engineering Statement. For towers or concealed support structures, a report from a qualified independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia documenting the following information. 
(1)  The location of the facility by longitude and latitude and Georgia Plan Coordinate System, ground elevation and total height in English and metric measurements. 
(2)  Total anticipated capacity of the tower or concealed support structure, including assumptions as to number and type of antennae supported. 
(3)  Evidence of the structural integrity of the structure with respect to wind and ice loadings. 
(4)  Design characteristics that indicate the limits of falling debris in the event of catastrophic structural failure. 
(5)  A scale drawing of the site and area that indicates distances to the nearest residential uses. 
(E)  Map. A map that illustrates the proposed tower location with respect to the nearest airport. 
(F)  FAA Determination. A determination by the FAA regarding hazards to air navigation. 
(G)  Contact or Agent. Identity and current contact information of the person authorized by the applicant to answer questions from the local government or community regarding construction and operation of the facility. Include name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
O.  [Rights-of-way.] 
A.  Application For Use of Right-of-way. 
1.  Unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, any applicant that places or seeks to place wireless communication facilities in the public roads and highways or rights-of-way of Columbus shall provide to the Columbus Consolidated Government (CCG) Division of Traffic Engineering the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of a principal office and local agent of such applicant; 
b.  Proof of certification from the Georgia Public Service Commission of such applicant to provide wireless communication services in this state where required by state law, or Federal Communications Commission licensure where state certification is not required; 
c.  Proof of insurance or self-insurance of such applicant adequate to defend and cover claims of third parties and of municipal authorities. Columbus Consolidated Government (CCG) shall be named as an additional insured of the property; 
d.  A description of the applicant's service area and capacity, within Columbus which description shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow Columbus to respond to subscriber inquiries. For the purposes of this paragraph, an applicant may, in lieu of or as supplement to a written description, provide a map on 8 ½" by 11" paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the geographic service areas and associated service capacities within the boundaries of Columbus; 
e.  A description of the services to be provided; 
f.  An affirmative declaration that the applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including municipal ordinances and regulations, regarding the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights of way that are reasonable, nondiscriminatory, and applicable to all users of the public rights of way, including the requirements of Chapter 9 of Title 25, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act"; and 
g.  A statement in bold type at the top of the application as follows: "Pursuant to section 3.2.72.0 of the Columbus Unified Development Ordinance and paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of Code Section 46-5-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the municipal authority shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies in this application within 15 business days of receipt of this application." 
2.  Applicants will be notified in writing of any application deficiencies within 15 calendar days of receipt of this application. If no such notification is given within 15 calendar days of the receipt of an application, such application shall be deemed complete. 
3.  Within 60 calendar days of the receipt of a completed application, CCG may approve or deny such application by notification to the applicant The failure of CCG to approve an application within 60 calendar days of the receipt of a competed application shall be deemed to constitute final approval of such application. 
B.  Placement of small cell technology in the right-of-way. 
1.  The following standards shall apply for the placement of small cell technology in the public right-of-way, or on a public road or CCG easement. 
Any small cell technology in a city right-of-way shall be co-located on the property of a utility, or other franchisee, legally existing in the public right-of-way unless the applicant can demonstrate that no co-location opportunities exist in the area of need. A lease agreement will be required if the colocation opportunity is on a CCG facility. If the applicant demonstrates that no co-location opportunities exist, the applicant may submit an encroachment permit to CCG Engineering Department to allow for a small cell wireless support structure within the area of the public right-of-way. 
C.  Co-location Standards. 
1.  All co-location structures must comply with section 7.11.1 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and shall not increase the height of the tower or non-tower structure by more than ten percent or ten feet whichever is greater, over existing structures that are located in the right-of way within the vicinity of construction. 
2.  All equipment and support infrastructure shall have a color and finish to blend with the structure to which they are attached to. 
3.  Any support structure shall be made of steel, composite, metal, wood or concrete. 
4.  All electrical wiring shall be concealed within the structure. If this is unattainable, then a covering of the same color as the structure may be used to conceal the wiring, but cause must be provided. 
5.  All electrical power shall be provided by underground utilities where feasible. 
6.  All modification construction plans shall be submitted with the encroachment permit to show schematics of utilities, accessory equipment, and location of underground utilities and overall height of the structure with antenna. 
D.  New Construction Standards. 
1.  If applicant can demonstrate that no co-location opportunities exist in the area of need, then the applicant must submit the following to support its proposed use of the right-of-way: 
a.  A construction plan, as defined herein, that describes the proposed wireless support structure and all equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment. 
b.  Evidence supporting the choice of location, including, without limitation, 
i.  Maps or plats showing the proposed location(s) of applicant's proposed wireless support structure(s); and 
ii.  A notarized statement from the individual responsible for the choice of location demonstrating that collocation of wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure was not a viable option because collocation: 
1.  Would not result in the same wireless service functionality, coverage, or capacity; 
2.  Is technically infeasible; or 
3.  Is an economic burden to the applicant. 
iv.  The map shall describe the boundaries of the geographic area to be served in clear and concise terms 
2.  A concealed support structure used to house a small cell antenna shall be no more than 40 feet in height with a five foot antenna. 
3.  Any support structure shall be made of steel, composite, metal or concrete; provided, wood support structures may be approved by the Director of Engineering when necessary to maintain compatibility with surrounding structures. 
4.  All electrical wiring shall be concealed within the structure. If this is unattainable, then a covering of the same color as the structure may be used to conceal the wiring, but cause must be provided. 
5.  All electrical power shall be provided by underground utilities where feasible. 
E.  Use By Public Utilities and Placement of Utilities. 
1.  All authorized public underground utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street right-of-way, placement of the various authorized utilities (power, gas, cable TV, telegraph or telephone company, internet provider, water and sewer) shall conform to the specific locations designated for such use by the city, as illustrated in section 7.11.1 of this UDO below. 
F.  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the applicant is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever Columbus determines that the public benefit would be enhanced thereby or the facilities or equipment thereon are no longer in use. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners, and such Facilities shall not interfere with or restrict pedestrian or other designated pathways. 
G.  Definitions. 
1.  Accessory equipment means: Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with small cell technology or a small cell technology wireless support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
2.  Modification construction plan means: When referring substantial modification of an existing wireless facility or wireless support structure means a plan that describes the proposed modifications to the wireless support structure and all equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment. 
3.  New construction plan means: When referring to a new wireless support structure means a written plan for construction that demonstrates that the aesthetics of the wireless support structure is substantially similar to the existing structures located in the right of way nearest the proposed location; includes the total height and width of the wireless facility and wireless support structure, including cross section and elevation, footing, foundation and wind speed details; a structural analysis indicating the capacity for future and existing antennas, including a geotechnical report and calculations for the foundations capacity; the identity and qualifications of each person directly responsible for the design and construction; and signed and sealed documentation from a professional engineer or surveyor that shows the proposed location of the wireless facility and wireless support structure and all easements and existing structures within 50 feet of such wireless facility or wireless support structure. 
4.  Small cell technology means: 
i.  Individual compact low-powered radio access base stations that include Femto cells, Pico cells, Micro cells and Metro cells having a range of 30 feet to 1000 feet; or 
ii.  Networks of spatially separated small cell wireless antenna nodes connected to a common source transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure commonly referred to as distributed antenna systems. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 12-53, § 5, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 14-2, § 6, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 14-45, § 1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 16-53, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-16) 
Section 3.2.73 - Foster Care Home. 
Foster Care Home shall comply with the standards listed below: 
A.  Number of Residents. Twenty-four-hour care, lodging, supervision and maintenance shall be provided for not more than six residents. 
B.  Character of Dwelling. In a single-family or multifamily residential zoning district, the character of the dwelling shall conform to the neighborhood in which the facility is located. 
C.  Signs in Single-family Zoning Districts. Installation of signs in a single-family zoning district comply with the standards of Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
D.  Compliance. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-017, § 5, 4-9-19) 
Section 3.2.74 - Group Foster Home. 
Group Foster Home shall comply with the standards listed below: 
A.  Number of Residents. Twenty-Four-hour care, lodging, supervision and maintenance shall be provided for not less than 7 or not more than 15 residents. 
B.  Character of Dwelling. In a multifamily residential zoning district, the character of the dwelling shall conform to the neighborhood in which the facility is located. 
C.  Signs. Signs shall comply with the requirements of Article 4 of Chapter 4. 
D.  Compliance. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-017, § 6, 4-9-19) 
Chapter 4 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 4.1.1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of the Chapter, unless provided otherwise in this UDO, shall apply to all development within the City. 
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Section 4.2.1. - Screening Required For Trash Areas. 
This Section shall apply to all trash areas, dumpsters, compacters, dumpsters and outdoor storage areas visible from any public street or from residential uses or zoning districts. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements of this Section shall apply dumpsters for sanitation or recycling services that are visible from any public street or any residential use or zoning districts. For the purposes of this Section, the term dumpsters shall include dumpsters, compactors, recycling bins, trash areas and similar equipment. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  Location. 
(A)  Accessibility. All dumpsters shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible for trash collection by sanitation vehicles. 
(B)  Distance from Residential Zoning Districts. Dumpsters shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from a residential zoning district, unless waived by the Director. 
(C)  Public Rights-of-way. Dumpsters shall not be located within the right-of-way of a public street or alley. 
2.  Screening. All dumpsters shall be screened from public view, from public rights-of-way and from abutting properties. 
(A)  Minimum Screening. Dumpsters shall be screened on all four sides, as indicated in Figure 4.2.1. 

Figure 4.2.1. 
(B)  Gates. Gates which must be closed when the dumpster in not is use. Gates shall be maintained in good repair. 
(C)  Materials. Dumpsters screening shall be compatible with shall be screened with materials of the same architectural style, color, and materials as the principal use. 
(D)  Repair. Dumpster screening enclosures shall be maintained in good repair. 
(E)  Minimum Height. All screening must be a minimum of six feet high. 
(F)  Surface. All dumpsters must be placed on a hard surface, of adequate size to accommodate the dumpster and garbage trucks. 
(G)  Application of Standards. These standards shall apply to all existing and future development within the City. For new development, the location of these dumpsters shall be shown on an approved site plan. 
(H)  Additional Standards. The City may adopt additional standards for pads or other surfaces on which dumpsters equipment are to be located. 
C.  Nonconforming Dumpsters. All existing nonconforming dumpsters in the Columbus Consolidated Government jurisdiction, shall be in compliance with these regulations, with the exception of the requirement for materials as described under paragraph B.2.(C) of this Section, no later than 18 months from the effective date of this UDO. Materials used for the screening of these dumpsters shall consist of either concrete, fieldstone, brick, stucco or wood picket fence to provide for an opaque design to screen the dumpster from the public's view. 
1.  Locations with Nonconforming Dumpsters. A use with a dumpster that does not conform to the requirements of this Section shall not cause the use, structure or property to be considered nonconforming. 
2.  Effect of Expansion or Improvements. Any use or structure that undergoes renovation, expansion or similar improvement in an amount equal to or in excess of 50 percent of the value of improvements shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
D.  Additional Screening. The City may require installation of landscaping to provide additional screening for dumpsters visible from a public right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
E.  Appeals. Appeals from decision of the Director regarding dumpsters are subject to the jurisdiction of the BZA, and appeals shall be filed as provided in Article 11 of Chapter 10. 
F.  Exemptions. This Section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Single-family and duplex residential dwellings; or 
2.  Temporary dumpsters, such as those placed on job sites during construction are exempt from this Section. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 4.2.2. - Lighting and Illumination. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Section is to limit the spillover of commercial or nonresidential lighting at or beyond a property line into property possessing a residential zoning district designation. 
B.  Applicability. Unless otherwise provided in these land development regulations, the requirements of this Section shall apply in all zoning districts. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to streetlights located within public rights-of-way. 
C.  Illumination Standards. Lighting standards are established in Table 4.2.1. 
D.  Compliance with Illumination Standards. Any use or structure that undergoes renovation, expansion or similar improvement in an amount equal to or in excess of 50 percent of the value of improvements shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
E.  Additional Standards. Illumination installed shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Automatic Reduction. At 11:00 p.m. each night, all illumination, excluding security lighting, shall be automatically extinguished. This standard shall not apply to the following: 
(A)  Lighting associated with an activity that is open to the public on a 24-hour per day basis; 
(B)  Lighting associated with an activity that operates under extended hours of business, provided that such activity does not abut a residential zoning district; 
(C)  Lighting that is required by the building code for security purposes; and 
(D)  Lighting that is required for public safety purposes such as airports and jails. 
2.  Lighting Plan Required. Plans for illumination of buildings, outdoor display areas, parking areas and similar uses shall be provided at the time a building permit is submitted for the following: 
(A)  All new uses and structures within a commercial, industrial or other nonresidential zoning district, excluding new uses located within an existing structure; 
(B)  Any use or structure within a commercial, industrial or other nonresidential zoning district subject to renovation, expansion or similar improvement in an amount equal to or in excess of 50 percent of the value of existing improvements; 
(C)  All new nonresidential uses and structures, such as a place of worship, private school, public building and similar use located within a residential zoning district; and 
(D)  Any nonresidential use or structure located within a residential zoning district subject to renovation, expansion or similar improvement in an amount equal to or in excess of 50 percent of the value of existing improvements. 
3.  Format of Lighting Plans. Plans for illumination of buildings, outdoor display areas, parking areas and similar uses shall be provided at the time a building permit is submitted. Illumination plans shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(A)  Design. Plans shall be prepared and sealed by an engineer registered in the State of Georgia, or as otherwise permitted by the Director. 
(B)  Plans. Lighting plan or plans, including photometric plans, including the following information: 
(1)  Overall site plan; 
(2)  Vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation; 
(3)  Location of parking stalls; 
(4)  Adjacent property lines, including existing uses and zoning district designations; 
(5)  Plan view of all fixtures, including pole and wall mounted; 
(6)  Height of all fixtures; 
(7)  Photometric data and statistical analysis, including foot candle values, the average maintained foot candles, the minimum foot candles, the maximum foot candles, points of calculation for foot candles, and similar information required by the Director; and 
(8)  Light fixture data, including height, manufacturer, wattage, lighting type, etc. 
Table 4.2.1.  Lighting and Illumination Standards 

 
4.  Glare. Lighting produced by illumination shall not be a public safety hazard for vehicle drivers. 
5.  Source not Visible. Any bulbs that are the source of lighting or illumination shall not be visible from any adjacent property line. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 8, 1-14-14) 
Section 4.2.3. - Outdoor Cafes in CRD Zoning District. 
Outdoor cafes in the CRD zoning district shall comply with the standards of this Section. 
A.  Definitions. Definitions relating to outdoor cafes are located in Chapter 13. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The outdoor cafe regulations as established in this Section are designed to encourage outdoor cafes on publicly-owned spaces within the CRD zoning district; to promote and protect public health, safety, and general welfare; and to provide for a more urban pedestrian environment. In addition, these regulations are designed to achieve the specific purposes listed below. 
1.  Promotion of Outdoor Cafes. To encourage and promote outdoor cafes as visual amenities which in turn encourages pedestrian activities and makes the urban environment more attractive. 
2.  Character. To preserve and enhance the character of the "CRD" and other commercial zoning districts. 
3.  Pedestrians. To ensure adequate space for pedestrians adjacent to outdoor cafes. 
C.  Operations. 
1.  CRD Zoning District. A cafe shall be operated by the proprietor of the adjacent establishment, located within the pedestrian area of the public right-of-way. 
(A)  Prohibited Areas. Cafes shall not be located within a state-owned right-of-way. 
(B)  Clear Passage to be Provided. A minimum seven-foot wide unobstructed clear passage for pedestrians shall be maintained. The minimum distance shall be measured from the portion of the outdoor cafe frontage that is nearest to either the curb line or to the nearest obstruction. 
(1)  An outdoor cafe shall not obstruct the exits and entrances of adjacent properties and shall not extend beyond the property lines of the establishment operating the outdoor cafe. 
(2)  Recesses in the outdoor cafe frontage shall not be used to satisfy the unobstructed width requirement. 
2.  Operation of Outdoor Cafes. A cafe shall be operated by the proprietor of the adjacent establishment, cafe operations shall not be located within the pedestrian area of any adjacent public right-of-way. 
(A)  Obstruction. An outdoor cafe shall not obstruct the exits and entrances of adjacent properties and shall not extend beyond the property lines of the establishment operating the outdoor cafe. 
(B)  Recesses. Recesses in the outdoor cafe frontage shall not be used to satisfy the unobstructed width requirement. 
D.  Definition of Outdoor Area. A cafe shall be defined by readily removable railings or fencing or a combination of railings or fencing and landscaping in planter boxes which separates the encroachment area from the remainder of the public right-of-way. 
E.  Use of Enclosed Area. The enclosure shall be used exclusively for dining, drinking and circulation therein. 
F.  Enclosure. The outdoor cafe shall be open to the sky, however fixed or retractable awning or table umbrellas may be provided. 
G.  Types of Service. An outdoor cafe may provide either wait service or sell take-out items to be consumed in the outdoor dining area. 
H.  Location. Outdoor cafes must be located immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor establishment which operates the cafe. 
I.  Umbrellas. 
1.  Anchoring. Umbrellas shall be secured and anchored with a minimum base of not less than 60 pounds. 
2.  Signage. Table umbrellas shall not contain any type of sign or signage except on the fringe or valance. 
3.  Traffic or Pedestrian Safety. A table umbrella shall not obstruct the clear vision of any traffic sign or traffic control signals or devices or interfere with pedestrian safety. 
4.  Encroachment. An umbrella lower than six feet six inches from the walkway surface shall not encroach past the defined boundary of the outdoor cafe. 
J.  Awnings. 
1.  Installation. Awnings shall comply with all building and fire code requirements. 
2.  Prohibited Material. The use of glass in awnings is prohibited. 
3.  Minimum Height and Supports. The minimum height of the awning shall be at least eight feet from the walkway surface. Awnings shall have no support posts located within the public right-of-way. 
K.  Planters, Railings and Fencing. 
1.  Support. All planters, railing, and fencing placed within an outdoor cafe shall be self-supporting. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of planters, railing and fencing is 36 inches. Vegetation with a planter is included in determining the maximum height. 
(A)  Drainage. Water drainage from any planters onto the walkway or sidewalk is prohibited. Planters shall have saucers or other suitable systems to retain seepage. 
(B)  Elevation. The outdoor cafe shall be at the same elevation as the adjoining walkway or sidewalk. 
L.  Ground Coverings Prohibited. Paint, grass, artificial turf, carpet, platforms or any other surface cover or treatment of any kind shall not be placed upon the area designated for an outdoor cafe. 
M.  Other Restrictions. 
1.  Tables and Food. Tables may not be preset with utensils, glasses, napkins or condiments. Outdoor food preparation and the storage of food or beverages are prohibited. 
2.  Music. Musical instruments or sound reproduction devices shall not be operated or used within an outdoor cafe. 
3.  Maintenance. The operator shall maintain an outdoor cafe in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. Trash receptacles shall not be located in the outdoor cafe or on the adjoining walkway. All liquid, food, debris, broken glass, and other trash is be cleaned from the walkway immediately. 
N.  Hours of Operation. Outdoor cafes may be open during the regular business hours of the establishment operating the outdoor cafe. If the outdoor cafe is not used for more than one week, all tables, chairs, railings, fencing, planter boxes and other furniture shall be removed from the walkway by the operator of the outdoor cafe. 
O.  Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. 
1.  Sale. Beer and wine are the only alcoholic beverages that may be served in the outdoor cafe area. 
2.  Removal. Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the designated outdoor cafe. Operators are responsible for ensuring their patrons do not remove alcoholic beverages from the premises. 
3.  Compliance with State Law. Sale of alcoholic beverages shall comply with all applicable state laws. 
P.  Compliance. The operator shall comply with all other federal, state or local laws, ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable Health Department standards. 
Q.  Closure by City Permitted. 
1.  Closure. In the CRD zoning district, the City shall have the right and power, acting through the City Manager, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor cafe at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the walkway area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to the following: 
(A)  Scheduled festivals and similar events; 
(B)  Parades or marches; 
(C)  Street or sidewalk repairs; 
(D)  Demonstrations; or 
(E)  Declared or undeclared emergencies. 
2.  Notice. To the extent possible, an operator shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the City will prohibit the operation of the outdoor cafe. Failure to provide prior written notice shall not affect the right and power of the City to prohibit the cafe's operation at any particular time. 
R.  Encroachment Permit Required. 
1.  Operation. In the CRD zoning district, an outdoor cafe shall not be operated without an encroachment permit issued by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Application for Encroachment Permit. 
(A)  Proposed Encroachments. The applicant shall provide a scaled drawing of proposed encroachment locations. 
(B)  Scaled Drawing. The scaled drawing shall conform to the standards and conditions set forth herein and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The proposed layout, materials, and design; 
(2)  The relationship of the proposed encroachment to the curb, obstacles, existing buildings, and buildings on either side; and 
(3)  Existing or projected pedestrian traffic movements. 
(C)  Approval Required. Approval of the scaled drawing is required prior to operation of an outdoor cafe. 
S.  Enforcement. The operator shall adhere to the scaled drawing and all requirements of this subsection. The operator shall not change, increase, or decrease the approved materials or scaled drawing layout without written authorization from the Director of Engineering. 
T.  Revocation. An encroachment permit can be revoked at any time by the City by giving the operator 30 days written notice of the revocation. More than two violations of the provisions of this Article shall constitute cause to revoke the encroachment permit. There shall be no refund issued for any permit that is revoked. 
U.  Certificates of Appropriateness. If the walkway area proposed for an outdoor cafe falls within the jurisdiction of the Uptown Facade Board or the Board of Historic and Architectural Review, the applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the appropriate board prior to issuance of an encroachment permit. A copy of an approved certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted with an encroachment permit application. 
Section 4.2.4. - Outdoor Cafes and Seating in other Zoning Districts. 
Excluding the CRD zoning district, outdoor cafes and seating shall be permitted when located on private property. Use of public right-of-way for outdoor cafes or seating is prohibited. 
Section 4.2.5. - Bay or Garage Doors. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide for the screening of day and garage doors from public rights-of-way and residential zoning districts. This requirement shall apply in all commercial, industrial, and nonresidential zoning districts. 
B.  Screening of Bay and Garage Doors Required. Unless otherwise allowed by this Section, bay or garage doors shall not be oriented toward public rights-of-way or residential zoning districts. 
C.  Options for Screening of Bay or Garage Doors. Screening of day or garage doors may be accomplished by one or more of the following techniques, including any combination thereof. 
1.  Orientation. The bay or garage door shall be oriented at a 90-degree angle away from a public right-of-way or residential zoning district, as indicated in Figure 4.2.2. The residential orientation requirement shall not apply if the bay or garage door is located at least 200 feet from any residential zoning district. 

Figure 4.2.2. 
2.  Increased Setback, Screening and Access Control. The building may subject to an increased building setback in order to provide each of the following site design elements: 
(A)  A clearly defined vehicle entrance; 
(B)  A clearly defined vehicle exit; and 
(C)  A screening and landscape buffer that is not less than 10 feet in width with trees, shrubs, berms, screening walls, or any combination thereof that is located along the entire area between the entrance and exit, extends for not less than 50 percent of the width of the property, and provides screening at a height of not less than five feet; 
3.  Screening Wall and Landscaping. A screening and landscape buffer that is not less than five feet in width, with trees, shrubs, berms, screening walls or any combination thereof that extends along the entire length a structure that contains bay or garage doors oriented toward a right-of-way or residential zoning district, and provides screening at a height of not less than five feet. 
4.  Screening by Permanent Buildings. Screening is provided by one or more permanent buildings located between a public right-of-way or residential zoning district. 
5.  Screening Wall and Buffer Requirements. For the purposes of this Section, screening and buffering shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(A)  The minimum height of not less than five feet shall be achieved within 12 months of installation of the buffering and screening when vegetation is utilized for all or a portion of the installation. Height requirements shall be measured from the grade or floor elevation of the development. 
(B)  All vegetation, including large maturing trees, small maturing trees, shrubs and ornamental grasses shall comply with the minimum installation size requirements of Section 4.5.10. 
(C)  A screening wall shall be permanent and constructed of masonry, brick, or similar opaque materials, and shall be consistent with the color and style of the principal structure. Height requirements shall be measured from the grade or floor elevation of the development. 
(D)  A berm shall average not less than one foot in height as measured across its entire length. 
(E)  Large maturing trees shall be planted at a ratio of at least one tree per 50 linear feet of buffer, or portion thereof. Small maturing trees shall be planted at a ratio of at least one tree per 40 linear feet of buffer or portion thereof. One small maturing tree may be utilized for each two large maturing trees that are installed. Tree species that are installed shall comply with the recommended and prohibited tree planting list of Table 4.6.5. 
(F)  When utilized in the buffer, shrubs and ornamental grasses shall be planted at a ratio of at least one shrub per two and one-half feet linear feet or portion thereof. 
(G)  Vegetative material shall be maintained in compliance with Section 4.5.12. 
(H)  Replacement of vegetation shall comply with Section 4.5.10.D. 
(I)  Trees shall be allowed to grow to their natural height and form. Topping of any tree necessary to comply with this Section is prohibited. 
(J)  Placement, installation and irrigation of all plant materials shall comply with Section 4.5.11. 
D.  Exception for Residential Zoning Districts. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to residential structures in residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.2.6. - Double Counting of Yards or Open Space. 
Unless otherwise provided herein for such permitted activities as shared or off-site parking, any portion of a lot, yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with these regulations shall not be included as part of a lot, yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or use. 
Section 4.2.7. - Painting or Marking of Public or Private Streets. 
A.  Prohibited. Painting or marking of public or private streets of the City is prohibited, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Painting or marking any curb on any street in the City with yellow or other colored paint or material; 
2.  Erecting or painting signs or lines in any street in the City indicating parking or ranking lines or places for vehicles; or 
3.  Erecting or painting signs or lines of any kind indicating hours of times for parking or ranking vehicles. 
B.  Exception. Painting or marking shall be permitted when authorized by the City, including the painting of addresses on a public curb face as may be permitted by the City Engineer. 
Section 4.2.8. - Administrative Offices for Residential Projects. 
A.  Office Permitted. An administrative office may be included within any multifamily residential project consisting of ten or more dwelling units. Offices may be located within the following zoning or overlay zoning districts: 
1.  HIST; 
2.  RMD; 
3.  RMF1; 
4.  RMF2; 
5.  PUD; 
6.  UPT; 
7.  CRD; 
8.  SAC; 
9.  PCD; and 
10.  PID. 
B.  Residence. The administrative office may include a residential dwelling for onsite management or security. 
C.  Restrictions. The office shall be used only for the operation and management of the project. Activities of any sort not related to the project are prohibited. 
Section 4.2.9. - Secondary Uses for Retail Sales and Personal Services. 
In multifamily, institutional, office or hotel buildings, secondary uses for retail sales and personal services shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the standards listed below. 
A.  Minimum Size. A secondary use shall be permitted only within a permitted principal structure or use that exceeds more than 50,000 square feet. 
B.  Maximum Size. 
1.  Multifamily Building. Not more than 25 square feet per dwelling unit in a multifamily building. 
2.  Motel or Hotel. Not more than 25 square feet per hotel or motel room. 
3.  Office or Institutional Building. Not more than ten percent of gross floor area of an office or institutional building. 
C.  Access and Advertising Limitations. 
1.  Entrances and Access. Access to secondary uses shall be located within interior lobbies, hallways or similar areas. Exterior access is prohibited and may not be waived by the Council. 
2.  Advertising. Secondary uses shall not utilize show or display window or advertising or displays that are visible from the exterior of the building or a public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
3.  Storage or Display. Display or storage of goods or materials associated with a secondary use shall be located only within the interior premises of such use. 
D.  Exceptions. Restaurants or cafeterias associated with a hotel or motel use may be located in a separate structure. In the HIST zoning district, a restaurant or cafeteria shall comply with the requirements of Section 3.2.41. 
E.  Parking Lots or Garages. Public or private commercial parking facilities may include gasoline pumps that are completely enclosed within the principal structure. 
Section 4.2.10. - Conduct of Commercial and Industrial Activities. 
A.  Enclosure. Unless otherwise provided in this Section or within these land development regulations, all commercial, business, industrial and nonresidential activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed structure. 
B.  Exemptions. The requirements of this Section not apply to the following activities: 
1.  All principal uses identified as wholly or partially operating outdoors; 
2.  Junk, salvage or auto wrecking yard; 
3.  Monument sales; 
4.  Nursery and garden supply, retail; 
5.  Nursery and garden supply, wholesale; 
6.  Pottery, outdoor furniture and similar retail sales; 
7.  Produce sales; 
8.  Sale of vehicles, mobile homes, sheds and similar structures; 
9.  Sign fabrication; 
10.  Storage of vehicles; 
11.  Temporary sales or events as provided in Section 3.2.65; 
12.  Towing service; and 
13.  Similar activities as determined by the Director. 
Section 4.2.11. - Drive-in Windows. 
Drive-in windows, including queuing areas and ordering areas shall be located, landscaped, screened, buffered, and oriented in such fashion as to minimize the impacts of noise, auto exhaust emissions, loud speakers, headlights, and similar potential nuisance items on adjacent residential zoning districts. In addition, each drive-in window shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Design. Drive-through facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
B.  Separation. Each drive-through lane shall be separated from the circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress from the property or access to any parking space. 
C.  Marking. Each drive-through lane shall be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly delineated in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer. 
D.  Queuing and Stacking. The queuing or vehicle stacking capacity of a drive-through facility shall be at least 100 feet. The minimum distance shall be measured from the centerline of the window closest to the edge of right-of-way from which access is provided. The stacking capacity may be increased based upon individual circumstances as determined by the City Engineer. 
E.  Ordering and Pickup Facilities. The design and location of ordering and pickup facilities will be determined for a proposed use based on traffic engineering and planning data. Any request for a drive-through facility shall include the information listed below. 
1.  Nature of the product or service being offered; 
2.  Method by which the order is processed; 
3.  Peak demand hour; 
4.  Percentage of sales or business conducted via drive-through facilities; and 
5.  Anticipated vehicular stacking required. 
F.  Pass-by Lane. Each drive-through facility shall provide a pass-by lane separate from the drive-through lanes. The pass-by lane shall provide a minimum width of ten feet. Each drive-through facility shall provide a pass-by lane separate from the drive-through lane, when the lane is also used for parking access. The design shall be approved by the Director of Engineering. 
G.  Roofing. Roofs constructed as part of a drive-through facility shall be consistent with the architectural style, materials, and colors of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.2.12. - Minimum Public Street Frontage Required. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, a principal building shall not be constructed on a lot that possesses public street frontage of less than 25 feet. 
Section 4.2.13. - Lots and Lot Coverage. 
Lot coverage calculations shall not include carports, screen enclosures, swimming pools, and similar unenclosed structures. 
Section 4.2.14. - Fencing, Walls and Hedges. 
A.  Fencing Permitted. Fences, walls and hedges are permitted subject to the standards listed below. 
1.  Maximum Height. Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding eight feet in height may be permitted in any required yard along the edge of a yard, or within a yard in any zoning district. 
2.  Exceptions. Fences, walls and hedges shall not impair or block the vision of vehicle drivers so as to constitute a safety hazard. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Easements and Encroachments. Fences, walls and hedges shall not obstruct public easements nor encroach or overhang dedicated rights-of-way. 
5.  Corner Rights-of-way. Fences, walls and hedges shall be at least 20 feet from any corner right-of-way line. As indicated in Figure 4.2.3, exceptions to this requirement may be granted for hedges or ground cover with a height of 30 inches or less and trees with a clear trunk of not less than eight feet. The clear trunk shall be measured from grade to the bottom of the lowest portion of the lowest branch. 

6.  Opaque Walls and Fences. When an opaque wall is required by this UDO, the wall shall not be constructed of any combination of chain link fences, screening applied to such fences, plastic or wooden slats inserted in such fence, or any similar installation. 
B.  Maintenance. Fences, walls and hedges shall be maintained in good order by the owner of the property and, as applicable, shall include but is not limited to such routine items as trimming, replacement of missing vegetation, painting, and replacement of rotten or deteriorated wood or other materials. 
C.  Exception. Major and minor auto repair services and salvage, disassembly or storage yard shall provide fencing as required in Section 3.2.4. 
(Ord. No. 07-82, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Section 4.2.15. - Calculation of Number of Stories. 
A.  Attic Space. Attic space is construed as one-half story if used in whole or part for dwelling or habitable purposes. 
B.  Basement as a Story. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if subdivided and used for dwelling or business purposes. 
Section 4.2.16. - Conversion of Residential Accessory Structures. 
Residential accessory structures may be converted to a principal residential use, subject to the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Exempt Residential Zoning Districts. This Section shall not apply in the RE10, RE5, RE1 and RT zoning districts. 
B.  Minimum Standards for Residential Conversions. 
1.  Density. The dwelling unit shall not exceed the maximum density allowed by the Comprehensive Plan or this UDO. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size. The dwelling unit shall be located on a lot that conforms to the requirements of the zoning district. 
3.  Parking. The dwelling unit shall provide the required number of parking spaces. 
4.  Property Development Regulations. The dwelling unit shall comply with all property development regulations of the zoning district. 
5.  Creation of Lot by Subdivision. The principal structure created from an accessory dwelling shall be located on a separate lot that complies with the requirements of this UDO. The lot shall be subdivided consistent with the requirements of this UDO. 
6.  Nature of New Principal Structure. The new principal structure created in accordance with this Section shall be a dwelling unit that complies with the definition of Chapter 13. 
Section 4.2.17. - Exceptions to Height Limits. 
In all zoning districts, the following exceptions to height limits shall apply. 
A.  Exceptions. Bulkheads, chimneys, cooling towers, fire towers, gas tanks, public monuments, silos, spires, steeples, television and radio towers and wireless communications structures and towers are exempt from height limitations. Also exempt are mechanical appurtenances that are located above the roof level. 
B.  Human Occupancy Prohibited. Any structure exempt from height limitations shall not be used for human occupancy. 
C.  Federal Aviation Administration. All structures shall comply with height limitations established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Section 4.2.18. - Required Yards. 
In all zoning districts, the standards listed below shall apply to required yards. 
A.  Obstructions or Encroachments Prohibited. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, all yards shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky. 
B.  Double Counting Prohibited. A required yard for one use or structure shall not be counted as part of the required yard for another use or structure. 
C.  Encroachments. An encroachment of not more than four feet into a required yard may be allowed for one or more of the following structural features: awnings, balconies, belt courses, cornices, eaves, gutters, lintels, open porches, outside staircases, sills, and similar architectural or structural features. 
D.  Double Frontage Lots. The main entrance to the building shall determine the front yard for lots with two or more street frontages. 
E.  Alleys. One-half of the width of an alley abutting a side or rear yard may be included as part of the required yard. 
Section 4.2.19. - Number of Structures on a Lot. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, this Section shall determine the number of structures on a lot. 
A.  Maximum Number of Residential Structures. 
1.  Single-family Dwellings. Not more than one principal dwelling shall be allowed on any lot. 
2.  Multiple Family Dwellings. The number of multiple family dwellings on a lot, including two-family and three-family structures, shall be determined by the property development regulations of the underlying zoning district as established in Chapter 2, including minimum lot size, minimum setbacks and minimum building area. 
B.  Minimum Distances between Multifamily Dwellings. Minimum separation distances are provided in Table 4.2.5. 
Table 4.2.5.  Minimum Separation Distances for Multifamily Dwellings. 

 
Section 4.2.20. - Minor Utility Structures Permitted in All Zoning Districts. 
In all zoning districts, minor utility improvements or structures providing for public safety, public utilities, and similar elements to promote the public welfare are permitted, including such improvements as drainage facilities; fire hydrants; ground-mounted utilities support structures and poles for cable television, electricity, natural gas, telephone, and related services; lift or pump stations; postal collection boxes; public or private streets; water and sewer lines; and similar public improvements. 
Section 4.2.21. - Manufacturing Standards. 
A.  Manufacturing, Heavy. 
1.  Hazardous Materials. May include the storage and use of flammable, toxic, or explosive materials. 
2.  Outdoor Storage. These activities also may include the outdoor storage of raw or finished materials prior to processing or distribution. 
B.  Manufacturing, Light. 
1.  Permitted Activities. May include the manufacture, assembly, storage, distribution, and incidental sale of goods from processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of from materials previously prepared, processed, or partially assembled. 
2.  Prohibited Activities. Light manufacturing does not include heavy industrial processing of materials, pressing, smelting, plating of metal, food processing, and similar processes. 
Section 4.2.22. - Encroachments into Public Rights-of-Way. 
Certain structures may be permitted to encroach into sidewalks as provided in this Section. 
A.  Maximum Encroachment. Maximum encroachment shall not exceed five feet. 
B.  Structures Permitted. Structures that may be permitted to encroach into public rights-of-way include the following: 
1.  Awnings and canopies; 
2.  Balconies; 
3.  Clocks; 
4.  Hanging signs; 
5.  Marquees; and 
6.  Projecting signs. 
C.  Minimum Height. A minimum distance of at least eight feet between the top of grade and bottom of structure shall be provided. 
D.  Existing Structures. As of effective date of this UDO, existing structures in a GC or CRD zoning district that encroach over or upon a public right-of-way shall be allowed to remain. Replacements for such structures, or new buildings which propose to continue such encroachments, may be permitted subject to approval of the Council, subject to an advisory recommendation provided by the City Engineer. 
E.  Approval of New Structures. Structures constructed after the effective date of this UDO shall not encroach into public rights-of-way other than as provided in this Section. 
Section 4.2.23. - Screening of Mechanical Equipment. 
All ground-, wall-, or roof-mounted mechanical equipment associated with nonresidential buildings and structures, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be screened from public view. 
A.  Screening Required. The highest portion of mechanical equipment, including but not limited to equipment, meters and valves for public utility services; satellite antennas; heating, ventilating, and air conditioning; or other utility hardware on roofs, ground, or buildings shall be installed at or below the highest level of screening materials. 
B.  Screening Materials. 
1.  Compatibility. Materials used for screening purposes shall be compatible with the architectural style, color, and materials of the principal building and its overall landscaping. 
2.  Use of Landscaping. Screening achieved by use of landscaping must include a dense use of planting materials, or structures such as earth berms, opaque walls or fences, or combination thereof. 
C.  Application of Screening Requirements. 
1.  New Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures constructed after the effective date of this UDO shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
2.  Exemption for Existing Buildings. Existing buildings or structures are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
3.  Improvements to Existing Buildings. Any building or structured that is expanded, renovated, rehabilitated or otherwise improved shall comply with this Section if the work is valued at 50 percent or more of the value of existing improvements. 
Section 4.2.24. - Storage of Recreational Vehicles, Boats, and Trailers. 
Storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers in all residential zoning districts shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Maximum Size. Vehicle size shall not exceed 32 feet in length. 
B.  Salvage Prohibited. Salvage, junkyard operation, or disassembly of vehicles to obtain parts is prohibited. 
C.  Outdoor Storage of Disassembled Vehicles. Outdoor storage of disassembled vehicles or parts is prohibited. 
D.  Compliance with Other Requirements. In addition the requirements of this Section, storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers shall comply with all other requirements of this UDO and the City Code. 
Section 4.2.25. - Reserved. 
Section 4.2.26. - Retail Developments of Community Significance. 
A.  Statement of Purpose. Any large-scale development has the potential to affect significantly the natural environment and the value and use of adjacent properties, public water and sewer services, roadway capacity and traffic patterns, local and regional economies, and the public health, safety, and general welfare of Columbus Consolidated Government residents. Review of proposed large-scale developments is designed to insure that future land uses are suitable to the demands and needs of our citizens, while also insuring that large-scale building development is compatible with its surrounding area and contributes to the overall community character of Columbus. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to achieve and maintain an overall integrity to the development through landscaping, architectural design and signage; to promote pedestrian access within the development; and to insure the long-term health of the natural environment. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable only in retail developments totaling 200,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area; or uses that result in a building of 100,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area whether by new construction or by expansion of existing uses. These sections shall also apply to all contiguous out parcels associated with the overall development. 
C.  Compatibility with City Plans. 
1.  The applicant shall provide, through a written compatibility report, due at the time of applying for permits or rezoning, adequate evidence that the proposed building and overall development project shall be compatible with the city's comprehensive plan and any detailed neighborhood plan for the area. The compatibility report shall specifically address the following items: 
(A)  A detailed description of the proposed project and its design features; 
(B)  A description of how the proposed development is compatible with adopted city plans, including the comprehensive plan, detailed neighborhood plans, and other plans officially adopted by the city; 
(C)  Impact on utilities and public services, including water, sewage, storm drains, solid waste disposal, police and fire protection, emergency services, schools, and other public services; 
(D)  Impact on the physical and ecological characteristics of the site and surrounding land, including wetlands, floodplain, vegetation, wildlife habitat, and other environmental conditions; 
(E)  Impact on the community, including but not limited to scenic, historic, or archaeological conditions, with regard to scale, placement, lighting, landscaping, signage, parking, use of open space and design of buildings and structures; and, 
(F)  A completed transportation and traffic impact analysis in a format acceptable to the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
D.  Design Requirements. The following design standards must be met for each project subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure. 
(A)  Provide interparcel vehicle access points within the development between all contiguous tracts. 
(B)  All new utility lines shall be located underground. 
(C)  Sidewalks, streetlights and lighting for parking areas shall be required as specified in the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(D)  Raised pedestrian walkways shall be installed through parking areas. 
(E)  Parking lots shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least ten feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. 
(F)  Interconnected walkways shall be constructed within the parking areas of the development with trees or other landscaping features to define a pedestrian-friendly corridor system. Principal pedestrian crossings of vehicular areas shall utilize change in materials or colors and shall implement traffic calming as maybe deemed necessary to encourage low vehicle speeds. 
2.  Landscaping Requirements. 
(A)  At a minimum, 20 tree density units per acre shall be required. Type and size of plantings shall be in compliance with the Unified Development Ordinance's requirements for buffers and trees. 
(B)  Landscaped islands throughout all surface-parking areas, as required by the buffer and tree sections of the Unified Development Ordinance, shall be provided. 
(C)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided between primary developments and adjacent out parcels. 
(D)  At a minimum, landscaped strips shall be planted in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance's requirements for buffers and trees. 
(E)  The provisions of this section shall be subject to section 4.6.18 of this ordinance. 
3.  Parking/Yard, Height and Setback. 
(A)  Up to 25% of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight feet in width and 17 feet in depth. 
(B)  Decorative, commercial-quality, bicycle racks, cart return areas, benches and trash receptacles shall be required and shall be approved by the director of planning. 
4.  Signage. 
(A)  The plan for exterior signage shall provide for modest, coordinated, and complimentary exterior sign locations, configurations, and color throughout the development, including outlots. Such signage shall complement on-building signage and shall provide a pole cover full width to the sign face with architectural design features, including color and materials common to those used in the design of the building(s) to which the sign is necessary. A minimum 100 square foot planting area shall be provided around the base of any monument sign. 
(B)  Consolidated signs for multiple users may be required instead of multiple individual signs. The city may require the use of muted corporate colors on signage if proposed colors are not compatible with the city's design objectives for the area. The use of logos, slogans, symbols, patterns, striping and other markings, and colors associated with a franchise or chain is permitted, and shall be considered as contributing to the number and area of permitted signs. 
(C)  The following types of signs are prohibited in these developments: portable signs; street banners; inflatable signs/flying signs; billboards; painted wall signs; bench signs; and roof signs. Signage may be internally illuminated with an opaque field to control glare. 
5.  Architectural Design. 
(A)  Architectural design shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(1)  Building facades visible from roadways or public parking areas shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used subject to review and approval of the director of planning. 
(2)  Metal sided or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be of colors compatible with the building and subject to approval and limited to the following materials: 
(i)  Metal standing seam. 
(ii)  Tile, slate or stone. 
(iii)  Wood shake. 
(iv)  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
(v)  Other materials subject to approval. 
(4)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent or within 1,000 feet of the subject property, or at least equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, which ever is less. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement. 
(5)  Any accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
(B)  Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(1)  To lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy, facades of multi-tenant buildings shall be varied in depth or parapet height. 
(2)  Distinct architectural entry identity for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(C)  All out parcel buildings within a proposed development shall be of an architectural character comparable to the primary structure as determined by the planning department. 
(D)  Walls visible from roadways or public parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(E)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be three feet, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(F)  Articulation of building design shall continue on all facades visible to the general public. 
6.  Outdoor Storage Uses And Areas. 
(A)  Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan, such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened as required by this ordinance. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses and to protect the outdoor area of the subject property. 
(1)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and residential district lines. 
(2)  Outdoor storage, loading and operations shall be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. 
(3)  Outdoor storage, trash collection and/or compaction, loading or other such uses shall be located in the rear of the lot. If because of lot configuration the director of inspections and Code determines that such placement is not feasible, then the side yard may be used, but in no case shall such area(s) be located within 15 feet of any public street, public sidewalk or on-site pedestrian way. 
(4)  Seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, bedding plants, etc. may be displayed in any outdoor area up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total not to exceed eight weeks per year. 
(5)  Areas for the storage and sale of all other merchandise shall be permanently defined and screened with walls or fences. Materials, colors and design of screening walls or fences shall conform to those used as in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the colors on the building. 
(6)  No product such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, cement, etc., containing toxic chemicals shall be stored in any uncovered outside location where they might enter the stormwater drainage system in the event of any spillage, breakage or tearing of container. 
E.  Maintenance of Vacant Buildings. 
1.  The following conditions shall also apply to property owners of any vacant premise in excess of 100,000 square feet: 
(A)  The property owner will maintain the exterior of the building so as to keep the appearance similar to that when the building was fully occupied. In the event the store is damaged or destroyed as a result of inclement weather, act of God, fire, or other catastrophe, the property owner will promptly notify city officials and initiate appropriate action to return the property to a safe and clean condition as soon as practical. 
(B)  The property owner will maintain the landscaped areas in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city and in the same condition as such areas were maintained when the store was open. 
(C)  The property owner will maintain the parking area in the same condition as such area was maintained when the store was open. 
(D)  The property owner will maintain the cleanliness of the entire site by removing any trash, rubbish, or other debris deposited on the site. 
(E)  The property owner will provide security patrols on the site to deter vandalism or other illegal activities on the property. 
(F)  The property owner shall use good faith efforts to market and re-tenant the premise. 
(G)  Should any single occupant premise in excess of 100,000 square feet become vacant for more than 60 days, and the property owner fail to maintain the property in accordance with the conditions listed above, the city may notify the property owner in writing of any such failures and in the event such failures are not cured within 30 days, the property owner shall be subject to citation by the inspections and codes division to recorder's court and shall be subject to the maximum fine permitted for ordinance violations for each violation of any provision of this ordinance or the Columbus UDO. As used in this Code section, "vacant" shall mean unoccupied for a period of 60 days or longer. Each day of any violation of any section of this section 4.2.26 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-33, § 1, 5-23-06) 
ARTICLE 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 4.3.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
This Article is intended to ensure that adequate off-street parking and loading is provided within the City. All parking and loading areas shall be designed and located for the following purposes: 
A.  To serve the use for which constructed; 
B.  To protect the public safety; and, 
C.  To mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent uses. 
Section 4.3.2. - Provision of Adequate Parking. 
The owner, developer, or operator of a specific use site shall provide and maintain adequate off-street parking and loading to meet specific characteristics of a use or combination of uses. 
Section 4.3.3. - Applicability of Article. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The requirements of this Article shall apply to all development, including new structures, alterations or improvements to existing structures, establishment of new uses, or change of use. 
2.  Off-street parking shall be available for use prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or occupational license. 
B.  Expansion. If an existing building, structure, or use that conforms to the off-street and parking and loading requirements is expanded, the area of expansion shall comply with requirements of this Article. 
C.  Change in Use. If a change of use or occupancy occurs and does not involve expansion of an existing building, the new use shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements of this Article. 
D.  Nonconformities as to Parking. If expansion occurs to a building that does not comply with off-street parking and loading requirements, the area of expansion shall comply. 
E.  Calculations. Calculations shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
F.  Assigned Parking. Parking spaces may be assigned to a specific use, provided the number of spaces assigned to a particular use does not exceed the number of spaces required for such use. Assigned spaces shall be indicated on the approved site plan associated with the affected use. 
Section 4.3.4. - Location of Required Parking. 
A.  Location. Parking facilities, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be located on the same lot as the principal use and shall provide convenient and safe access to the uses served by such facilities. 
B.  Joint Access for Parking Facilities. The City may require joint access between adjacent parking facilities constructed for nonresidential or multifamily residential purposes. Joint access may be required to achieve one or more of the following: 
1.  Reduce the number of entrances and exits along public roads and streets; 
2.  Expand existing joint access; 
3.  Increase pedestrian safety; 
4.  Reduce the number of vehicles entering or exiting public roads and streets; and 
5.  Increase utilization of public improvements such as frontage roads and limited access roads. 
C.  Residential Parking. 
1.  General. Parking spaces for all residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use and shall be located as close as possible to the entrance of such principal use. Parking for second floor, loft, and similar types of parking in mixed uses shall be exempt from this requirement. 
2.  Driveways. Driveways may be considered off-street parking spaces for single-, two-, and three-family and four-family dwellings. The length of the driveway must provide sufficient space to comply with the requirements of this Article. 
3.  Parking within Required Yards or Setbacks. 
(A)  Prohibited Parking. Parking of vehicles in any front, side, or rear setback, except on driveways or other approved surfaces, is prohibited. 
(B)  Temporary Parking. Temporary parking of vehicles in a yard is permitted for social or other events held at a residence, provided such parking shall not exceed eight hours in a 24-hour period. Temporary parking in a yard due to renovation or repair of a driveway or residence is permitted for the duration of the improvements. 
(C)  Parking of Commercial Vehicles and Construction Equipment. Parking of commercial vehicles and construction equipment in residential zoning districts shall comply with the requirements of Section 20-13.10 of the Code of Columbus. 
Section 4.3.5. - Construction and Maintenance. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Construction, Maintenance and Operation. Off-street parking facilities and loading shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the requirements listed below. 
(A)  Paving and Drainage. Drainage for off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with the requirements of this UDO. Unless otherwise provided by this Article, off-street parking facilities shall be paved with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, or other materials acceptable to the City Engineer. 
(B)  Maintenance. Residential and nonresidential off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained in proper condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. Drainage systems for off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer. 
2.  Striping. Striping of parking stalls and other traffic control features shall comply with requirements established by the City Engineer. 
3.  Lighting. Lighting of off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in compliance with Section 4.2.2. 
4.  Entrances and Exits. The City Engineer shall determine the number of entrances and exits to parking and loading facilities. Standards to assist in the location of entrances and exits include the following: 
(A)  The number shall be as few as possible; and 
(B)  The location shall be provided and located so as to minimize traffic congestion 
5.  Other Standards. 
(A)  Backing Out. Vehicles shall not be permitted to back out from parking or loading spaces into a public street or right-of-way. This requirement shall not apply to any residential dwelling located within a residential zoning district, unless precluded by public safety considerations such as daily traffic flow or the category of the street. 
(B)  Off-street Stacking. 
(1)  Off-street stacking distance shall be provided between the edge of right-of-way and the nearest intersecting drive aisle of a parking lot or location of a conflicting traffic movement. The minimum length of the stacking area shall depend on the number of parking spaces in the associated parking lot in accordance with Table 4.3.1. 
Table 4.3.1.  Minimum Stacking Requirements 

 
(2)  For any request to reduce stacking distance, the City Engineer shall consider lot depth, lot width, location of existing structures, existing circulation patterns, and similar factors. 
6.  Screening and Landscaping. 
(A)  Screening. All parking facilities and loading facilities shall be screened from adjoining uses as required in Section 4.6.11. 
(B)  Minimum Clearance. Tree limbs, signs, vegetation, or other obstructions shall not impede visibility between the heights of two feet and ten feet above pavement elevation at the entrances and exits. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.3.6. - Prohibition of Other Uses. 
Required off-street parking areas shall not be used for the following: the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicle; or the sale, repair, storage, or servicing of other equipment, materials, or supplies. 
Section 4.3.7. - Structured Parking Facilities. 
Parking facilities on more than one level shall be designed in accordance with the general standards established in this Section. 
A.  Accessory Use. Structured parking shall be considered an accessory use to a principal commercial or industrial use. Structured parking also may be constructed as a principal use. 
B.  Phasing. Construction of structured parking facilities may be phased when included as part of an approved site plan. 
C.  Standards. The Director shall consider the following standards when considering an application for development approval which includes a structured parking facility: 
1.  Layout; 
2.  Circulation; 
3.  Pedestrian orientation and circulation; 
4.  Ingress and egress affecting safety and convenience; 
5.  Landscaping proposed for the top and sides of the structure; 
6.  Landscaping, and screening and buffering from adjacent uses; 
7.  Proximity to residential zoning districts; 
8.  Lighting; 
9.  Appearance; 
10.  Architectural treatments to minimize visual impacts, including the use of opaque screening to conceal parked vehicles from public view; 
11.  Compatibility with adjacent structures; and 
12.  Mass and bulk of structure. 
Section 4.3.8. - Parking Stall and Bay Dimensions. 
A.  Minimum Dimensions. Minimum dimensions for parking stalls are indicated in Table 4.3.1 and Figure 4.3.1. 
B.  Paving. All minimum dimensions of parking spaces, travel aisles, and other vehicular circulation areas shall be paved. The City Engineer may approve use of specialty paver brick or surfaces. 
Figure 4.3.1  Minimum Parking Bay Dimensions 

LEGEND 
  
A=Stall Angle 
  
B=Stall Width 
  
C=Vehicle Projection 
  
D=Aisle Width, One Way 
  
E=Curb Length per Car 
  
F=Wall to Wall Width for Double Aisle 
  
G=Overlap Center Width for Double Aisle 
C.  Parking Bays. Parking bays, which are the total of stall depth plus aisle width shall provide for adequate maneuvering and parking space. Parking bays shall be subject to the minimum standards as described in Table 4.3.1 and Figure 4.3.2. 
D.  Location Near Sidewalks. Sidewalks located in front of parking spaces shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet or provide bumper stops or curbing to prevent the front of the vehicle from overhanging the sidewalks. 
E.  Parking Near Property Lines. All parking must be offset three (3) feet from any property line, unless an adjacent parking/access agreement exists between adjoining property owners. 
Table 4.3.2.   Minimum Parking Bay Dimensions for Residential and Nonresidential Uses 

 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 14-2, § 7, 1-14-14) 
Section 4.3.9. - Number of Parking Spaces Required. 
A.  Required Spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces required for individual uses is established in Table 4.3.2. 
B.  Maximum and Minimum Number of Parking Spaces. Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the number of required parking spaces established in this Section represents both the minimum and maximum number of parking spaces to be provided for an individual use. An increase or reduction in the number of required parking spaces may be requested as provided herein. 
C.  Parking Studies. 
1.  Parking Study Discretionary. As indicated in Table 4.3.3, the Director may request a parking study to demonstrate compliance with overall parking demand. 
2.  Mandatory Parking Study. For certain uses, a parking study is required, as indicated in Table 4.3.3. 
3.  Parking Study Standards. A parking study shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(A)  Preparation. The study shall be prepared by one or more of the following: 
(1)  A professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia; 
(2)  A landscape architect licensed by the State of Georgia; 
(3)  A planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) or possessing the qualifications to be a member of AICP; or 
(4)  An architect licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(B)  Professional Standards. The study will be conducted according to commonly accepted professional practices. 
D.  Unlisted Uses. For any use not listed in Table 4.3.3, the Director shall determine off-street parking requirements. 
E.  Exemptions. 
1.  Single-family and Two Family Dwellings. Unless otherwise provided herein, single-family and two-family dwelling units are exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
2.  CRD and UPT Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise provided herein, all uses within the CRD and UPT zoning districts are exempt from the requirements of this Article. 
Section 4.3.10. - Parking for Mixed Uses. 
Mixed use parking shall comply with the standards listed below. 
A.  Mixed Use Projects. For mixed use projects, such as a planned development, approved by the City Council with a specific percentage of individual uses, total off-street parking requirements shall be calculated based upon the requirements applicable to each individual use. 
B.  Shopping Centers. For commercial shopping centers or other centers that may provide a variety of mixed uses, the parking requirements for a general retail use shall apply. 
Section 4.3.11. - Change in Required Number of Spaces. 
A.  Reduction in Spaces. Unless otherwise provided herein, a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be granted as a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals or as a waiver to a planned development approval granted by the Council. 
B.  Increase or Decrease in Number of Required Parking Spaces. As applicable to the type of development order, the Director may authorize an increase or decrease in the number of parking spaces in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the required number of spaces. 
C.  Additional Parking. 
1.  Variance. Excluding planned developments, any application which requests an increase of parking equal to or greater than ten percent of required parking shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a variance. 
2.  Planned Developments. Any request for an increase of parking equal to or greater than twenty-five percent of required parking which affects a planned development shall be considered as request for approval of a waiver by the Council. 
3.  Standards for Additional Parking Spaces. An application to provide parking in excess of the minimum requirements shall comply, as applicable, with the standards for a variance or the standards for a planned development waiver. In addition, the requests shall consider the additional standards listed below. 
(A)  Additional Open Pervious Space. Additional open space, at a ratio of 1.0 square feet for each additional square foot of paved parking and vehicular circulation area, shall be provided. The additional pervious open space shall be provided as additional landscaping, pedestrian amenities, or pervious open space and shall be calculated and identified on the project site plan. This additional open space shall not be counted as complying with any open space, landscaping or other similar requirements of this UDO. 
(B)  Enhanced Site Appearance. The additional open space and landscaping shall be utilized to enhance the visual appearance of the site, the vehicular entries, and the parking areas. The method for visual enhancements shall be indicated in the application for development approval. 
Table 4.3.3. 
Off-Parking Street Parking Standards 

 
D.  Bicycle Parking in Lieu of Minimum Parking . 
1.  Applicability . Commercial buildings and multi-family residential buildings may elect to reduce their minimum parking requirements by providing bicycle parking at a rate of exchange of one standard parking space for every eight units of bicycle parking provided. Maximum allowable exchange will be determined by the Planning Director on a case by case basis. 
Rate of exchange 

 
2.  Function and Design . The recommended bike rack by the Association of Bicycle and Pedestrian Professionals is the inverted "U" design. This design is economical, secure, and well designed to meet the needs of many types of bicyclists and bicycles. Other designs may be used provided that they meet the functional criteria described below. 
Functional Criteria : 
(A)  Shall support the bicycle frame in at least two places. 
(B)  Must be designed in such a way as to allow the use of both cable and "U" locks. 
(C)  Must be designed in such a way as to allow bicycles with different types of frames to lock to the rack. 
(D)  Must be made of a material that is weather resistant and is difficult to cut with hand tools or saws. 
(E)  The racks shall be cemented or bolted into concrete to prevent theft or vandalism. 
3.  Placement and Setbacks . The bicycle racks must be placed within 75 feet of an entrance and in a visible, well-lit area. The bicycle racks may be placed in separate locations on the property but may not be reduced to fewer than two racks per location. Bicycle racks must be at least 24 inches away from buildings and five feet away from fire hydrants and infrastructure. The minimum distance between two bike racks placed side by side should be no less than 30 inches. If the bike racks are to be located within a parking lot or area with traffic, it is recommended that physical buffers or signage be created to protect bicyclists and notify vehicles to exercise caution. 


(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 15-43, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 15-55, § 3, 11-17-15) 
Section 4.3.12. - Shared Parking. 
A.  Permitted. The Council, may, as part of an approval of a new or expanded use, new construction, substantial renovation, or alteration or expansion of an existing site, approve the use of shared parking to reduce overall parking requirements. The basis for approval of an application to establish shared parking includes the factors listed below. 
1.  Complementary Uses. Use of a building or structure for two or more uses which possess complementary, rather than competing, peak hours of usage. 
2.  Shared Parking Study. Preparation, in a professionally accepted manner, of a shared parking study by a qualified professional as indicated in Section 4.3.12. 
3.  Development Order. Any development order approved by the Council which includes the use of shared parking shall include a separate agreement for shared parking. The agreement, at a minimum, shall include the provisions listed below. 
(A)  Provide one or more specific methods to re-assess the agreement if future parking problems or changes in use occurs. 
(B)  Provide a legal description of the land and structures included within the agreement. 
(C)  Provide for a term of the agreement of at least five years. 
(D)  Provide a site plan to indicate specific uses, hours of operation, location of parking facilities, and similar information required to illustrate the operation of the shared parking. 
(E)  Assure the availability of all parking spaces affected by the agreement for a period not less than the term of the agreement. 
(F)  Provide for the termination of the agreement if there is a change in the uses supporting shared parking agreement, and require each individual user to comply with all applicable parking requirements. 
B.  Amount of Parking. The amount of parking provided pursuant to a shared parking agreement shall be determined as follows: 
1.  Multiply the individual uses by the minimum required parking percentages per time period as contained in the five vertical columns of Table 4.3.4; 
2.  Add the sum of the calculations; and 
3.  The required parking is the largest number of spaces resulting from the calculations. 
Table 4.3.4. 
Shared Parking Calculations 

 
Section 4.3.13. - Off-Site Parking. 
A.  Permitted. Off-site parking is permitted, subject to the standards of this Section. 
B.  Zoning District. Off-site parking shall be permitted only within a nonresidential zoning district. 
C.  Maximum Distance. Not more than 500 feet shall separate the nearest public door of a use and the nearest property line of the lot utilized for off-site parking. 
D.  Measurement of Distance. Distance shall be measured based upon public pedestrian circulation patterns. 
E.  Agreement for Off-site Parking. An agreement for off-site parking shall be approved, subject to the requirements of Section 4.3.13. 
Section 4.3.14. - Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
A.  Required. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided as required in this Section. 
B.  Legal Nonconformities. This Section does not require installation of off-street loading facilities for uses that exist upon the effective date of this Code. 
C.  Change of Use. The City may require installation of required loading spaces when a change in use of any existing structure occurs. The installation may be required based upon such factors as the square feet occupied by the new use, operational characteristics of the new use, existing traffic circulation patterns, traffic safety or similar circumstances. 
D.  Expansion or Alteration. Any uses or structures which are enlarged, expanded, or changed, shall provide the required off-street loading facilities for the additional increment of the enlarged, expanded or changed use or structure. 
E.  Size of Loading Spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall comply with the minimum dimensions indicated in Table 4.3.5. 
Table 4.3.5.  Minimum Dimensions for Loading Spaces 

 
Section 4.3.15. - Required Number of Loading Spaces. 
A.  Number of Spaces. The required number of loading spaces is indicated in Table 4.3.6. 
B.  Applicability. Off-street loading spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 4.3.6 and shall be applicable to all structures containing commercial, business, industrial, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, processing, offices, hotels, hospitals, airports, railroad terminals, and similar uses as may be required by the Traffic Engineer. 
Table 4.3.6.  Minimum Number of Loading Spaces 

 
C.  Exception. Hotels and motels shall provide loading spaces based upon the number of rooms. An application for development order approval for a hotel, or which includes a hotel, shall provide a study documenting the number of loading spaces to be provided. 
D.  Cooperative Establishment and Use Of Facilities. Two or more neighboring uses may establish common off-street loading facilities, subject to approval by the City Engineer. The total number of common off-street loading spaces shall not be less than the number required for individual users, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Criteria for reduction in the total number of off-street loading spaces include the following: 
1.  Times of usage of the truck loading facilities by the individual users; 
2.  The location of the proposed common facilities; and 
3.  The character of the merchandise involved. 
E.  Other Requirements. In order to establish common off-street loading facilities, the standards listed below are applicable. 
1.  Consent. Written consent is obtained from all affected property owners. 
2.  Written Agreement. All conditions relating to the use, location, construction, and maintenance of the common facilities will be provided in a written agreement. 
F.  Location. Except as otherwise provided, off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same property that they serve. 
G.  Residential Zoning Districts. An off-street loading facility may be located within 50 feet of a residential zoning district if hours of operation begin at or after 7:00 a.m. and end not later than 11:00 p.m. For the purposes of this Section, hours of operation shall not include routine maintenance, cleaning or similar activities within a building. 
H.  Enclosure. The City may require off-street loading facilities to be enclosed to minimize visual impacts, noise, and related effects on adjacent property owners. 
I.  Refrigerated Trucks. Refrigerated trucks and other trucks which require compressors, engines, refrigeration equipment, and similar equipment to be continuously or periodically operational shall not park within 250 feet of any residential zoning district during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
J.  Circulation. Access and maneuvering areas, ramps, and other vehicular circulation areas associated with such facilities shall not be located on a public or private street right-of-way. All vehicular circulation shall be so arranged that the vehicles are not required to back from the street into the facility nor required to back from the facility into a street or other public-right-of-way. 
K.  Construction and Maintenance. Off-street loading facilities shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the standards listed below. 
1.  Drainage and Paving. Off-street loading facilities shall be properly graded for drainage and paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete consistent with City standards. 
2.  Maintenance. Off-street loading facilities shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. 
3.  Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that the source of light does not shine directly into adjacent residential properties or into traffic on adjoining streets. 
4.  Entrances and Exits. Entrances and exits to the facility shall be located so as to minimize traffic congestion or prevent vehicles from backing from the street into the facility. Streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way shall not be considered part of an off-street loading facility. 
5.  Striping. All off-street loading spaces shall be striped and clearly marked in a manner consistent with City standards. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
ARTICLE 4. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 4.4.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish a set of standards for the design, installation maintenance and removal of signs within the City. The City of Columbus, Georgia wishes to regulate signs within its jurisdictional boundaries under its police powers to accomplish the goals listed below. 
A.  Public Health. To promote and protect the general public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
B.  Community Appearance. To promote and protect the community's appearance by regulating the design, location, type, illumination, and maintenance of signs. 
C.  Regulate Use. To regulate the use of signs which provide direction and aid orientation for businesses and activities. 
D.  Hazards. To prevent possible traffic and safety hazards through good signage. 
E.  Revitalization. To revitalize areas of the City by reducing sign clutter and thus improving appearance. 
F.  Environmental Setting and Appearance. To provide a pleasing overall environmental setting and community appearance this is deemed vital to tourism and to the continued economic attractiveness of the city. 
G.  Variances. To accomplish each of the foregoing goals in a manner consistent with promoting the robust marketing atmosphere of the City and allowing the property owners, retailers, and merchants to continue to adequately advertise their services and products so that any requested variances will be carefully considered taking into consideration the marketing and advertising needs of the citizens of the City as well as the needs of the City in enforcing this Article. 
Section 4.4.2. - Definitions. 
Definitions for this Article are provided in Chapter 13. 
Section 4.4.3. - Review of Sign Applications. 
All sign applications must be reviewed and approved or denied by the Director of Inspection and Codes, within fifteen working days of the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.4.4. - Exempt Signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following on-site signs may be erected without securing a permit, subject, however, to the terms and conditions contained herein and meeting all other applicable codes and regulations. 
A.  Address Signs. Address or identification sign for residences, estates, farms, and ranches. Such signs must not exceed one square foot in area. 
B.  Individual Residential Lots. Signs for individual residential lots 
1.  Number. Signs must not exceed one in number. 
2.  Maximum Dimensions. Signs shall have a maximum size of six square feet, six feet in height, and with a ten foot minimum setback. 
C.  Sale, Lease or Rental Signs. Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental of property. 
1.  Number of Signs. Such signs shall be limited to one per street frontage per property. 
2.  Maximum Dimensions. Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area in residential districts or 32 square feet in other districts. 
3.  Location and Removal. Signs must be displayed on the property advertised for sale, lease, or rent. The signs must be removed no later than seven days after the sale, lease, or rental of the property. 
D.  Builder's Name. Signs indicating the builder's name. 
1.  Number of Signs. Such signs shall be limited to one per street frontage per property. 
2.  Maximum Dimensions. Signs shall not exceed six square feet in residential district or 32 square feet in other districts. 
3.  Location and Removal. Signs must be displayed on the property advertised for sale. The sign must be removed no later than seven days after the sale of the property. 
E.  Associated Professionals Signs. Signs indicating the architect, engineer, project name, source of financing, and contractors when displayed during the construction period on a construction site. 
1.  Maximum Dimensions. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area in residential districts or 16 square feet in other districts. 
2.  Location and Removal. Signs must be displayed on the construction site. All signs must be removed seven days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
F.  Ground or Monument Signs. 
1.  Sign Permitted. A permanent ground or monument sign with a sign surface area of 15 square feet or less in a commercial, industrial, or RO zoning district. 
2.  Exemption. This is not an extra sign, but is ground or monument sign authorized by Section 4.4.10. 
G.  Specific Exemptions. Any sign inside a building and any sign attached or painted on a building below roofline in a nonresidential zone. This includes signs on windows, awnings, canopies, and walls and includes projecting signs and marquis signs. 
H.  Governmental Signs and Legal Notices. Governmental and legal notices, including signs required by federal and state regulations. 
I.  Flags. Flags attached to freestanding poles mounted on the ground, or mounted on a building. 
1.  Number. Not more than three in number. 
2.  Commercial Use Prohibited. Flags shall not be used in such a way as to attract the attention of the public for commercial purposes. 
J.  Directional Signs. Directional signs, with copy not to exceed three square feet in area. 
K.  Symbols. Symbols or insignia including religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies. 
L.  Holiday Decorations. Holiday decorations, lights or displays with no commercial messages erected in connection with the observance of holidays. 
M.  Incidental Signs. Incidental signs limited to information or direction related to the permitted use on the lot or building or a directory sign within an office park, industrial park, hospital campus, school campus, or within the confines of any other similar development. 
N.  Vehicle Signs. Signs attached to or painted on a licensed vehicle for the purpose of advertising a business or service or advertising the sale of a vehicle by a licensed car dealer. 
O.  Banners. 
1.  Permitted Zoning Districts. Banners used in commercial, industrial, or RO zoning districts. 
2.  Location and Attachment. Banners must be attached at all corners to a permanent principal structure or canopy. 
P.  Multifamily Building Signs. Multifamily building identification signs, addresses and parking lot identification signs for an individual building. 
Q.  Menu Board Signs. 
1.  Permitted. Menu boards shall be permitted in UPT and CRD zoning districts. 
2.  Maximum Number. One menu board shall be allowed per business. 
3.  Maximum Size. Boards shall not exceed nine square feet in size. 
4.  Permitted Location. Boards shall be positioned so as to be adjacent to that business whose menu is listed on the board and be placed in a manner clearly visible to pedestrian traffic. 
5.  Rights-of-way. Menu boards shall not be placed in a City right-of-way without permission from the City's Traffic Engineer. 
6.  Removal. All menu boards shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
R.  Drive-Thru Menu Boards. Drive-thru menu boards set back beyond building line. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.4.5. - Prohibited Signs. 
All signs not expressly permitted under this Article or exempt from regulation in accordance with this Article are prohibited within the Columbus Consolidated Government. Such signs include, but are not limited to the signs listed below. 
A.  Conflicts with Traffic Control Signals. Lights or signs that by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or signals. 
B.  Unshielded Illumination. Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or are a hazard or a nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties such as sealed beam, flood or spotlights. 
C.  Noise and Sounds. Signs that produce noise or sound capable of being heard even though the sound produced are not understandable sounds. 
D.  Emitting Signs. Signs that emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor. 
E.  Natural Features. Signs attached to trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features except posted on property or "no trespassing" signs less than three square feet. 
F.  Unlicensed Vehicle Signs. Signs attached to or painted onto an unlicensed vehicle parked on and visible from a street, except on a licensed auto dealership property. 
G.  Bench Signs. Bench signs in public right-of-way or within 30 feet of street or public right-of-way. 
H.  Revolving Signs. Revolving signs. 
I.  Roof Signs. Roof signs. 
J.  Decorative Signs. Decorative items/deluxes/ornamentation. 
K.  Moving Signs. Flappers/moving signs. 
L.  Signs not Otherwise Identified. Any other sign not authorized as exempt from permitting or otherwise specifically authorized by this Article. 
Section 4.4.6. - Temporary Signs. 
Temporary signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Temporary Sign Permit Required. A temporary sign may be erected only after obtaining a temporary sign permit from the inspections and code enforcement division. 
B.  Prohibited Locations. A temporary sign shall not be erected in a residential zoned district. 
C.  Time Limitations. A temporary permit cannot be obtained for the same property within a period of 30 days after the expiration date of a previous temporary permit. 
D.  Removal. If any temporary sign is not removed by the expiration date of the permit, the Building Official may remove it and charge the costs of removal to the individual or enterprise responsible. 
E.  Permitted Temporary Signs. Permitted temporary signs are listed below. 
1.  Civic Event Signs. Special event signs, banners, and directional signs directing the attention of the public to special events sponsored, in whole or in part, by the City or by religious, charitable, nonprofit or public service groups may be erected on public property with the approval of the City Manager. 
(A)  Such signs shall be nonilluminated. 
(B)  Such signs shall be allowed 30 days prior to the event and must be removed within five days following the event. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code section, the City Manager may approve banners for placement on public rights-of-way recognizing an enterprise zone or redevelopment area on file with the Planning Division for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
2.  Temporary Signs For New Businesses. A new business or a business in a new location with no permanent signs may obtain a temporary permit for a sign for 90 days. 
(A)  The maximum size of said sign shall be 32 square feet. 
(B)  The sign must be removed at the end of 90 days or when permanent sign is erected or a permanent permit is issued for the sign. 
3.  Inflatable Signs and Advertising Balloons. A temporary permit for 15 days per property may be granted for the use of on-site inflatable signs/advertising balloons. 
(A)  A temporary permit shall be obtained for not more than one time in a six-month period. 
(B)  The required setback is 20 feet from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-79, § 1, 10-25-05) 
Section 4.4.7. - Portable Signs. 
A.  Annual Permit Required. A portable sign may be used only after obtaining an annual permit from the Department of Inspections And Codes, and only under the conditions listed below. 
B.  General Standards. The standards listed below are applicable to portable signs. 
1.  Maximum Size. Maximum size of 72 square feet. 
2.  Illumination. No flashing illumination. 
3.  Minimum Setback. Set back a minimum of three feet from the right-of-way. 
4.  Permitted Zoning. Such signs may be allowed on residentially zoned property when associated with special events sponsored in whole by religious, charitable, nonprofit or public service groups, and shall only be allowed with the approval of the Inspections and Code Department 30 days prior to the event and must be removed within five [days] following the event. 
5.  Maximum Number. Only one portable sign allowed per street frontage. 
6.  Electrical Code Compliance. Every sign capable of illumination must comply with the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-82, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.4.8. - Signs in the Public Right-of-way. 
A.  Generally. It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain or place any permanent sign upon the right-of-way of any public streets and thoroughfares unless authorized by the City for the following purposes. 
1.  Public Notice and Information. Permanent signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, and to convey public information. 
2.  Bus Stops. Bus stop signs. 
3.  Traffic Signs. Regulatory signs giving notice of traffic laws or regulations. 
4.  Warning Signs. Warning signs calling attention to conditions on, or adjacent to, a highway or street that are potentially hazardous to traffic operation. 
5.  Guide and Information Signs. Guide signs showing route designations, destinations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, and other geographical, recreational or cultural information. 
6.  Service Signs. Service signs providing travelers with business identification and directional information for essential motorist services. 
7.  Recreation and Cultural Signs. Recreational and cultural area signs used to direct persons to facilities, structures, and places, and to identify various services available to the general public. 
8.  Emergency Warning Signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way. 
9.  Flags. Flags erected by local, state, or federal officials or their designees. 
10.  Entrance and Exit Signs. Authorized entrance and exit signs with no advertising less than 2.5 square feet. 
11.  Identification Signs. Subdivision, apartment, office park signs, and industrial park signs authorized by City or approved on plat of subdivision, apartment, office park, or industrial park, provided such signs contain no additional form of advertising. 
12.  Pole Banners. Pole banners erected by local, state, or federal officials or their designee. 
B.  Design Standards for Signs in a Public or Private Right-of-way. Design standards for signs erected in a public or private right-of-way shall be according to the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
C.  Violations. Any signs installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this Article, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. 
1.  Event Signs. Event organizers, promoters, or their representatives of specific events advertising on public property, shall be deemed responsible. 
2.  Removal Costs. In addition to other remedies cited in this Article, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(Ord. No. 08-66, § 1, 11-25-08) 
Section 4.4.9. - Sign Number and Area Computation. 
The following sign standards specify the number, types, sizes, heights, and locations of ground and monument signs which are permitted in Columbus, Georgia and which require a permit. 
A.  Determining the Number of Signs. In determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered a single sign if the following applies: 
1.  Unit Created. A single display surface containing elements organized to form a unit. 
2.  V-Type or Multiple Sided Signs. A V-type or multiple-sided sign shall be regarded as one sign as long as the sides are not separated by a distance exceeding 20 feet. 
3.  Double Face Signs. With respect to a double faced (back to back) signs, the distance between the backs of each of the sign does not exceed three feet. 
B.  Determining Total Sign Surface Area. In measuring the area of signs permitted under these regulations, the entire face of the sign (one side only) and any wall work incidental to its decoration shall be included. 
1.  Double-faced or V-Shaped Signs. A double-faced or V-shaped sign constituting a single sign as identified in this Section, where both sides contain lettering or other allowable display, one side only shall be used to compute the allowable size of the sign. 
2.  Multiple Faced Signs. With respect to multiple-sided signs, the sign surface area shall be computed by measuring the sum of the area of any two adjacent sides. 
3.  Exception to Area Calculations. If a double faced, V-shaped or multiple-sided sign is separated by a distance greater than that allowed to be considered a single sign, then the signage area is measured as the sum of the area of all sides. 
4.  Individual Letters or Irregular Signs. Where the sign consists of individual raised letters or a sign face of irregular shape, the sign area shall include the area of the smallest rectangle that can encompass the letters or sign face, exclusive of its supports. 
C.  Determining the Height of Signs. 
1.  Measurement of Height. The height of a sign erected shall be the distance above the grade level at the foot of the sign structure to the top of the sign or sign structure. 
2.  Elevated Grade Levels. In instances where the level of the road or highway is elevated, the maximum height of the sign and its structure shall be the distance above the grade level of the road or highway at the point nearest the sign and its structure. 
D.  Minimum Setbacks. All signs and sign structures must be located at least three feet from any property line and outside of all intersection sight distance lines. 
Section 4.4.10. - Ground and Monument Sign Size and Height. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  UPT and CRD Zoning District Ground/Monument Sign. 1 sign. 150 square feet; 20 feet high. 
2.  NC, RO, CO, GC, LMI, and HMI Zoning District Ground/Monument Sign. 
(A)  Lots Less Than 300 Feet Road Frontage. One sign with maximum height of 35 feet with a maximum of 250 square feet. Lots with road frontage more than 300 feet on one street are allowed one additional sign. Combined square footage for all signs shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
(B)  Lots More Than 300 Feet of Road Frontage on Two Streets. Two signs with maximum height of 35 feet and maximum square footage of 300 square feet for both signs combined. 
3.  RE10, RE5, RE1, SFR1, SFR2, SRF3, RMD, RMF1 and RMF2 Zoning District Ground/Monument Signs. See Section 4.4.4 regarding exempt signs. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.4.11. - HIST Zoning District Signage. 
(A)  General Provisions. The appearance, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials, color, and design of such signs is in keeping with the collective characteristics of the structure located within the appropriate historic district or landmark properties. 
(B)  Permitted Signs. Signs may be allowed within a historic zoning district shall be further limited as follows. 
(1)  Off-site signs shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Business signs shall be limited to one sign only for each street frontage per premises and shall not be over five feet in height. 
(3)  Maximum area of any sign associated with a historic residential use shall be two square feet; maximum area of any sign associated with a historic commercial use shall be 12 square feet. 
(4)  No sign may extend above the top of the nearest facade, eaves, or firewall of a building or structure. 
(5)  No sign that flashes, blinks, revolves, or is put in motion by the atmosphere shall be permitted. Backlit signs are not allowed. No visible bulbs, neon tubing, luminous paints, or plastics will be permitted as a part of any sign. 
(C)  Illumination. Buildings and signs within the historic zone may be illuminated by remote light sources, provided that these light sources are shielded to protect adjacent properties. 
(D)  Real Estate Sign Removal. Real estate signs shall be removed not more than ten days after the closing of a sale of a house or lot. 
(E)  Portable Signs and Banners. Portable signs and banners are prohibited; except for special events where they may be displayed for no more than ten days for the event. 
(F)  Paper Signs. Paper signs attached to windows (announcing sales, etc.) are discouraged and under no circumstances are to be allowed beyond 15 days. 
(G)  Sign Location. 
(1)  Should be integrated architecturally with the building, or on an awning in accordance with the zoning code limitations. 
(2)  Signs will not be attached directly to building so that they obscure, cover or disfigure architectural features and details. 
(H)  New Signs. 
(1)  New signs should be compatible with principal/accessory structures on a site and with surrounding buildings and sites in size, shape, design, materials, overall appearance, method of attachment, erection and location. 
(2)  Shall not obscure the view to or from a historic site or building. 
Section 4.4.12. - Multiple Franchise Business Signs. 
Businesses having two or more franchises to conduct business on the same parcel of land or business development, shall be exempt from the requirements for ground and monument signs, provided they can meet the following provisions. 
A.  Required Signs. Signs required by a franchise must be supported with documentation as to the requirement for such signage by the franchiser or licensor. 
B.  Logos. Signs may contain the corporate or franchise logo. 
C.  Compliance. Signs must meet the requirements of the zoning classification in which they are located. 
Section 4.4.13. - Billboards. 
A.  Permitted Locations. Billboards are permitted in GC, LMI, and HMI zoning districts and are subject to compliance with all other provisions of this Article. 
B.  Prohibited Locations. Maintaining the aesthetics of the entrances to this community, its gateways, is important. New or larger billboards within 660 feet shall not be allowed along the following gateways: 
1.  2nd Avenue; 
2.  The J. R. Allen Parkway/U.S. 80/Falline Freeway from the Alabama state line past its intersection with the Columbus Manchester Expressway to its intersection with the west side of Flat Rock Road and I-185 north of its intersection with the J. R. Allen Parkway/U.S. 80, except for signs which may be authorized by the Georgia Department of Transportation within the highway right-of-way; and 
3.  River Road, north of the J.R. Allen Parkway. 
C.  Setback Requirements. Setback requirements for all billboard signs shall be no less than 15 feet from the right-of-way. 
D.  Permitted Sign Dimensions and Area. 
1.  Permitted Dimensions and Area. Billboards shall be 12 feet by 25 feet, 25 feet by 25 feet, 10.5 feet by 36 feet, or 14 feet by 48 feet and shall not exceed 672 square feet. 
2.  Permitted Extensions. In determining the square footage, the following extensions are allowed and not included in the 672 square feet: a five-foot extension at the top, a two-foot extension on each side, and a one-foot extension on the bottom. 
E.  Determining the Number of Signs. In determining the number of signs, the following shall be considered a single sign if the following applies. 
1.  Single Display Surface. A single display surface containing elements organized to form a unit. 
2.  V-Type and Tri-face Signs. A V-type and tri-face sign shall be regarded as one sign as long as the sides are not separated by a distance exceeding 20 feet. 
3.  Double Faced Signs. With respect to a double faced (back to back) sign, the distance between the backs of each of the sides does not exceed five feet. 
F.  Determining Total Sign Surface Area. 
1.  Double Faced or V-Shaped Signs. To measure the allowable sign area of billboard signs permitted under these regulations, a double-faced or V-shaped sign constitutes a single sign as identified in Section 4.4.9, and is measured by computing the area of one side only. 
2.  Tri-face Signs. With respect to tri-face signs, the total sign surface is measured as the sum of the areas of any two adjacent sides. 
3.  Double Faced and V-Shaped Signs. The allowable sign area of signs with equal size and shape for both double-faced (back-to-back) and V-shaped signs is measured by computing the area of only one side of the sign. 
(A)  Equal Size Required. Both sides of the double-faced and V-shaped sign shall be of equal size. 
(B)  Multiple Faced Signs. The sign area of sign with three or more side, multiple sided signs, is measured as the sum of the area of any two adjacent sides. 
G.  Spacing of Signs. 
1.  Minimum Separation Required. No part of any permitted billboard sign may be erected within 1,250 feet on the same side of the street with any other billboard sign. No other billboard sign shall be erected within 1,250 feet as measured by an arc from a permitted billboard sign on the same side of the street. Said minimum separation for billboard signs are indicated in Figure 4.4.1. 

2.  Limited Access Road Locations. 
(A)  Minimum Distance Required. Billboards located along limited access roads shall not be located within 500 feet of an interchange, intersection at grade, or safety rest area. 
(B)  Measurement of Distance. The foregoing 500-foot zone shall be measured along the highway from the point at which the pavement commences or ceases to widen at exits from or entrances to the main traveled way. 
3.  Intersections. Measuring from the center point of an intersection, no outdoor advertising structure shall be located within a 650 feet radius of said center point. Said minimum separation for billboard signs at intersections are indicated in Figure 4.4.2. 

H.  Sign Facing Orientation. Any permitted, outdoor advertising structure facing shall face perpendicular to the street to which it has been permitted. Said sign facing orientation for billboard signs is indicated in Figure 4.4.3. 

I.  Structure Specifications. All poles and structural members shall be of metal and shall be mounted on a single pole. 
J.  Height Requirements. 
1.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of the sign and its structures shall be 60 feet above the grade level at the foot of the sign structure to the top of the sign or sign structure. 
2.  Exception. In instances where the level of the highway is elevated, the maximum height of the sign and its structure shall be 60 feet above the grade level of the highway at the point nearest the sign and its structure. 
K.  Cap and Replace. No billboard or multiple message board shall be erected until such time as the following criteria is met: 
1.  If a static billboard is erected, two square feet of existing space shall be removed for each square foot of new space to be erected. 
2.  If a multiple message board is erected, five square feet of existing space shall be removed for each square foot of new space to be erected. 
3.  A 50 percent space bonus shall be applied to square footage of existing, legal nonconforming structures removed. 
4.  A structure removal permit shall be submitted when a new structure permit is requested. 
5.  Relocation of existing structures shall not be subject to this section if removal or relocation is due to road projects or safety upgrades. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 10-66, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 4.4.14. - Permitted Locations. 
Multiple message signs shall be permitted in GC, LMI and HMI zoning districts under the following conditions. 
A.  Minimum Fixed Period. Each sign shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds. 
B.  Change of Message. When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. 
C.  Minimum Separation. Also see Section 4.4.13.C.2 and Section 4.4.13.C.3 regarding spacing of signs. 
1.  No part of any permitted multiple message sign shall be erected within 5,000 feet as measured by an arc from another multiple message sign on the same side of the street. Said minimum separation for multiple message signs are indicated in Figure 4.4.4. 

2.  No digital multiple message sign face shall be placed within 1,000 feet of a residential structure as measured by an arc from the sign's digital face. Said minimum separation for digital multiple message sign faces from residential structures is indicated in Figure 4.4.5. 

D.  Default Design. Any such sign shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
E.  Maximum Size Limitations. Any maximum size limitations shall apply independently to each side of a multiple message sign. 
F.  Compliance. Such signs are subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Article. 
G.  Setback Requirements. See Section 4.4.13.C regarding setback requirements. 
H.  Permitted Sign Dimensions and Area. See Section 4.4.13.D regarding permitted sign dimensions and area. 
I.  Determining the Number of Signs. See Section 4.4.13.E regarding the determination of number of signs. 
J.  Determining Total Sign Surface Area. See Section 4.4.13.F regarding the determination of total sign surface area. 
K.  Structure Specifications. See Section 4.4.13.I regarding structure specifications. 
L.  Height Requirements. See Section 4.4.13.J regarding height requirements. 
M.  Cap and Replace. See Section 4.4.13.K regarding cap and replace. 
N.  Existing non-digital multiple message boards shall be permitted to convert to digital multiple message boards within twelve months of the effective date of this ordinance, December 14, 2010. Said conversions shall be completed within the aforementioned twelve months. No digital multiple message sign face shall be placed within 500 feet of a residential structure as measured by an arc from the sign's digital face. Said minimum separation for digital multiple message sign faces from residential structures is indicated in Figure 4.4.6. 

(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 10-66, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-32, adopted Apr. 5, 2005, changed the title of § 4.4.14 from multiple message signs to permitted locations. 
Section 4.4.15. - Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Signs. 
A.  Design and Construction. The design and construction of all signs shall be in accordance with the structural and construction requirements set forth in the building and electrical codes adopted by the State of Georgia and Columbus Consolidated Government. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Maintenance and Painting. All signs, including those specifically exempt from this code in respect to permits and permit fees, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in repair and unless of galvanized or non-corroding metal shall be thoroughly painted at least every two years. 
2.  Removal. The Building Official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Such removal shall be at the expense of the owner or lessee. 
3.  Unsafe Signs. 
(A)  Securing or Removal. Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Building Official, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall upon written notice from the Building Official, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, remove such signs or secure the same in the manner to be approved by the Building Official, in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
(B)  Failure to Comply. If such order is not complied within ten days, the Building Official may remove such signs in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
C.  Weeds, Grass, Litter and Debris. Weeds and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, and underneath and around the base of ground signs, no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be permitted under or near such signs. 
Section 4.4.16. - Abandoned Signs. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any signs that are located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, purpose or service which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises. 
Section 4.4.17. - Removal of Signs. 
A.  Removal of Dangerous Signs. The Building Official may cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically, or structurally defective sign, or a sign installed, erected or constructed in violation of this Article. 
B.  Notice. The Building Official shall notify, by registered mail or written notice served personally, the applicant listed on the permit application thereof to alter such signs so as to comply with this Article or the building code and to secure the necessary permit therefore, or to remove the sign. 
C.  Failure to Comply. If such order is not in compliance within ten days, the Building Official may remove such signs in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
D.  Commencement of Time. Any time periods provided in this Article shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the registered mail or written notice. 
E.  Failure to Notify Owner. 
1.  Owner Cannot Be Contacted. For all other signs in which the owner is unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained, the Building Official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of complaint and notice upon such party may be made by publishing the notice once a week for two successive weeks in the newspaper of general circulation published in Columbus, Georgia. 
2.  Posting. A copy of such notice served by publication shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice. If the owner of the sign is known, the notice shall be mailed to or delivered to the owner or the occupant of the property. 
3.  Emergency. In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is imminent danger to the life or safety of any person, the Building Official may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. 
F.  Status of Removed Signs. Any sign caused to be removed by the Building Official shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. 
G.  Cost of Removal. The cost of removal of the sign by the City shall be considered a debt to the City by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property, and may be recovered in any appropriate court action by the City or by assessment against the property. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expense incurred by the City in connection with the sign removal. 
Section 4.4.18. - Nonconforming Signs; Generally. 
A.  Legal Signs. Any sign legally in existence prior to adoption of this Article that does not satisfy the requirements of this Article are declared nonconforming and subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Legal Nonconforming Signs. Any sign legally in existence prior to February 10, 1998, which does not conform to the requirements set forth in this Article may be continued as a nonconforming sign and any request for changes in size or height of such a sign shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals as a request for variance. 
2.  Temporary, Portable and Banner Signs. All temporary and portable signs, and banners must be removed and comply with the provisions for temporary and portable signs, and banners by April 13, 1998. 
B.  Replacement. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panel, painted boards or demountable material on a nonconforming sign shall be permitted. 
C.  Permitted Maintenance and Repair. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs, including changing of copy, electrical repairs or lettering repairs and necessary nonstructural repairs that do not further extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign shall be permitted. 
D.  Damage or Destruction of Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  Structural Repair. Structural repairs shall not be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this Article. 
2.  Compliance Required. If a legal nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent that 50 percent or more of its current replacement value, exclusive of the cost of the support structure, the sign may not be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it conforms to all of the provisions of this Article. 
3.  Replacement Authorized. If the damage or destruction of the nonconforming sign is less than 50 percent of the replacement value, the sign may be rebuilt to its original condition in terms of size and height and may continue to be displayed. 
E.  Change in Business or Change in Sign. A nonconforming sign shall be removed or altered to conform to the requirements of this Article when the nature of the business conducted on the premises changes or the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend. 
Section 4.4.19. - Permit Procedures. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, construct, enlarge, relocate or convert any sign in the City of Columbus without first obtaining a sign permit from the Inspection and Code Division of the City of Columbus. 
B.  Application. In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter, or relocate any sign under the provisions of this Article, an applicant shall file with the Building Official a sign permit application that sets forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including the following information. 
1.  Owner Information. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor erector. 
2.  Lot Owner. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the lot on which the sign is located if different from those designated above. 
3.  Location. The location by street address of the proposed sign. 
4.  Drawings and Elevations. A scaled drawing and an elevation drawing of the proposed sign including the number of sides of the sign. 
5.  Plans for Scope and Structure. Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings, and materials to be used as provided by the erector or builder of the sign. 
6.  Electrical Permit Application. Application and required information for such application, for an electric permit for all electric signs if the person erecting the sign is to make the electrical connection. 
7.  Consent. A written consent from the owner of the property on which sign shall be erected. 
8.  State Approval. Any sign that requires a state permit from the Department of Transportation must provide a copy of such permit prior to the issuance of the local permit. 
9.  Site Plan. A site plan showing the following information. 
(A)  Name of applicant or owner, including address and telephone number if such exist. 
(B)  Boundaries and dimensions of the lot. All dimensions shown on site plans related to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey. 
(C)  North arrow. 
(D)  Location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures. 
(E)  Dimensions of all yard and setback requirements. 
(F)  All driveways, including the width of each. 
(G)  Location and dimensions of individual off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(H)  All existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
(I)  All easements. 
(J)  Protective measures as indicated on the plot plan in cases involving rezoning. 
(K)  Other details as may be necessary to ensure conformance with the applicable ordinances and regulations of Columbus, Georgia, or as may be required by the Building Official. 
C.  Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement. 
1.  Agreement. Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the City harmless for all damages, demands, or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure (standard form). 
2.  Business Liability Insurance. Each applicant shall present to the Building Official upon request a certificate of business liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
Section 4.4.20. - Issuance of Permit. 
A.  Review of Application. It shall be the duty of the Building Official, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit, to examine plans, specifications and other data and if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this Article and all other applicable provisions of this Article, the Building Official will have a maximum time of 15 working days to respond to the application. 
B.  Effect of Newly Acquired Information. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the Building Official from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if upon further review of newly acquired information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this Article. 
C.  Decal. 
1.  Issuance. All applicants shall be issued a decal identifying the applicable permit by a reference number. 
2.  Attachment. The issued decal is required to be affixed to the sign. 
3.  Transfer Prohibited. The decals are not transferable from one sign to another and must be placed at all times on the sign described and permitted in the corresponding permit application. 
4.  Failure to Comply. Failure to have a decal on a sign shall be prima facie evidence that the sign is not lawfully permitted. 
Section 4.4.21. - Review by the Board of Historic and Architectural Review. 
A.  Review Required. All signs requiring a permit that are located in an historic district, have achieved landmark status, or listed on the National Historic Register shall be reviewed by the board of Historic and Architectural Review (BHAR). 
B.  Standards for Review. The BHAR shall consider the appearance, size, location, structure materials, color, and appropriateness of the sign in relation to the structure on the premises and contiguous area. 
C.  Permit Issuance. No permit shall be issued by the Building Official until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued for the sign by the BHAR. 
Section 4.4.22. - Signs in the UPT and CRD Zoning Districts. 
A.  Compliance with Uptown Facade Board Guidelines. All signs located in the Uptown Columbus, Uptown Zoning District (UPT), or the Central Riverfront District (CRD) must meet all the design requirements set forth by the Uptown Facade Board Guidelines. 
B.  Compliance. All such signs are subject to all other provisions of this Article. 
C.  Permit Issuance. No permit shall be issued by the Building Official until approval has been obtained from the uptown facade board by the owner of the sign. 
Section 4.4.23. - Inspection, Revocation and Penalty. 
A.  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this Article are subject to inspection by the Building Official. 
B.  Revocation. 
1.  Misrepresentation. A permit shall not constitute a contract and a vested right shall not be acquired by any person, firm, or corporation holding such permits where same was issued upon any misrepresentation, intentional or nonintentional. 
2.  Effect of Misrepresentation. In such events, such permits may be revoked upon notice in writing given by the chief of the inspections and code enforcement division to the person, firm, or corporation holding such permits and such revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt of such notice. 
3.  Permit Fees. Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this Article, the applicant shall pay fees as established by the Council. 
C.  Penalty. If any person actually begins any work for which a permit is required by this Article, without having first obtained a permit therefore shall pay, in addition to the fees set forth in Table 4.4.1, an additional amount equal to 100 percent of such fees and shall be subject to any penalties described herein. The payment of a double fee for failing to obtain the appropriate permit shall not relieve any person from complying with other provisions of this Article. 
D.  Time Limitation. A sign permit shall become null and void if the construction of the sign for which the permit was issued is not begun within a period of six months after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 06-51, § 1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.4.24. - Variances. 
A.  Variance May Be Granted. 
1.  Authority for Variance. Where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, the Board shall be authorized to grant a variance from the terms of this Article where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest where, due to special conditions surrounding such signage, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Article will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship provided that such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Article. 
2.  Standards. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon the finding of the board of zoning appeals that: 
(A)  The granting of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to other property or impair the purpose and intent of this Article; 
(B)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(C)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular sign in question because of topographical conditions of the specific property involved, site distance, site distance times due to speed of vehicular traffic, physical surroundings, or shape, that would result in a particular hardship to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out; 
(D)  The strict application of this Article to the particular sign would deprive an applicant of reasonable use of the land or would create an unnecessary hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; and 
(E)  Such special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequently to the adoption or amendment of this Article. 
B.  Procedure. Variances under this Article shall be granted under the same procedures and conditions as set forth in Article 11 of Chapter 10, with the exception that any appeal of the decision of the board of zoning appeals pertaining to the sign request shall be made directly to the Council. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 4.4.25. - Noncommercial Speech Protection. 
Any sign allowed herein may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity, or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so long as said sign complies with the size, height, area, and other requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 4.4.26. - Enforcement and Administration. 
A.  Administration. The Building Official shall have primary responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this Article and is hereby given full authority to enforce any and all provisions of this Article. 
B.  Appeals. When the owner feels aggrieved by a determination of the Building Official, the owner shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
1.  Filing of an Appeal. Any such appeal must be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant of this Article. 
2.  Action by the Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the Building Official, but only if a majority of the members of the board of zoning appeals finds that the Building Official abused its discretion in reaching the decision. 
3.  Appeals. Appeals from decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be made directly to the Council, but no such appeal shall be allowed until and unless the aggrieved party has exhausted the remedies previously set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 4.4.27. - Violation. 
Violations of this Chapter shall be enforced as provided in Chapter 12 of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
ARTICLE 5. - LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING 

Section 4.5.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum landscaping, screening and buffering standards for development, redevelopment or expansion of property that will provide one or more of the following benefits: 
A.  Amelioration of adverse impacts between different uses and zoning districts; 
B.  Buffer more intensive land uses from less intensive land uses; and 
C.  Protection of the public health, safety and general welfare by minimizing noise, air, dust and visual pollution; reducing the heat and glare absorbed and radiated by development; preserving property values and the character of neighborhoods; helping to control soil erosion and stormwater runoff; and improving the aesthetic appeal of the City. 
Section 4.5.2. - Definitions. 
Definitions relating to landscaping, screening and buffering are located in Chapter 13. 
Section 4.5.3. - Effective Date. 
The effective date of this Article is the date of the adoption of this UDO. 
Section 4.5.4. - General Standards. 
The standards listed in this Section shall apply to all landscaping, screening, buffering, tree preservation, and tree planting. 
A.  Fences and Fencing. Fences shall be installed consistent with building code requirements and Section 4.2.14. Fencing that is required or installed shall be located at the property line. The finished surface of a fence shall face abutting properties. 
B.  Berms. Berms shall have a maximum slope of 3:1 and a minimum crown width of two feet. Berms shall be planted with vegetative ground cover. 
C.  Planned Developments. For planned developments, including the operations of clearing or grading, the owner shall comply with the standards of this Article and with the requirements of this UDO regarding erosion and sedimentation control, and all other applicable portions of this UDO. 
D.  Installation. The installation of buffers shall not be required until: 
1.  A certificate of occupancy is requested for a developed parcel; and 
2.  At that time only the buffer for a developed parcel should be required. 
E.  Public Properties. All other development including all Columbus Consolidated Government- and government-owned property or school district property, shall comply with the requirements of this Article. 
F.  Redevelopment. 
1.  Redevelopment of a site shall require the application of Articles 5 and 6 of this Chapter. 
2.  Redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site; 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square feet of buildings or a site's physical development, by 50 percent or greater; or 
(C)  An expansion of the gross square feet of buildings or site's physical development that cumulatively totals more than 50 percent since the effective date of the original Buffer Ordinance (April 29, 1999). 
G.  Minimum Standards. The standards provided in this Article are the minimum requirements and may be exceeded, except for minimum fence heights. Any deviation from minimum or maximum fence height requirements shall occur only as a variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Amend. of 4-5-05; Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.5.5. - Applicability. 
A.  Application. This Article shall apply to all development as indicated below. 
1.  Property Proposed for Development. All appropriately zoned lots requiring a building permit and proposed for development shall conform to this Article. 
2.  Change in Zoning. A change in zoning shall require compliance with the standards of this Article. 
3.  Special Exception Uses. An approval of a special exception uses shall require compliance with the standards of this Article. 
4.  Sites Two Acres or Less. On sites two acres or smaller, additions or expansions greater than 5,000 square feet shall comply with the standards of this Article. 
5.  Site More than Two Acres. On sites greater than two acres, additions or expansions greater than 10,000 square feet shall comply with the standards of this Article. 
(A)  Additions. This includes additions cumulatively totaling more than 10,000 square feet since the effective date of the Article. 
(B)  Exemptions. Additions or expansions located at least 100 feet from any property line shall be exempt, except on property lines that but parcels with one or more of the following zoning designations: RE10, RE5, RE1, RT, SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, RMD, RMF1, RMF2, MHP or HIST. 
(C)  Additions less than 100 Feet from a Property Line. Additions or expansions located less than 100 feet from any property line shall: 
(1)  Provide the required buffer along all portions of the addition or expansion less than 100 feet from the affected property lines; and 
(2)  Buffers shall extend between building lines and shall include the entire length of property lines. 
Section 4.5.6. - Minimum Buffer Requirements. 
A.  Installation of Buffers. 
1.  Buffers to be Installed. Table 4.5.1 indicates the type of side and rear buffers to be installed based upon the zoning of both the property to be developed, redeveloped or expanded and of the abutting property. 
2.  Additional Buffers. Additional buffers may be required by this UDO, including the following: 
(A)  Article 5 of Chapter 2, regarding master planned developments; 
(B)  Chapter 6, regarding buffers for conservation subdivisions; and 
(C)  Chapter 5, regarding buffers for streams and water bodies. 
Table 4.5.1  Minimum Side and Rear Buffer Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.5.7. - Buffer Categories and Options for Side or Rear Yard Buffers. 
An applicant may choose the option to be used for rear and side yards based upon the category of buffer as established in Table 4.5.2. A list of tree species to be used in the buffers is provided in Table 4.6.5. 
Table 4.5.2.  Options for Buffers in Side or Rear Yards 

 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.5.8. - Required Street Buffers. 
A.  All portions of a parcel proposed for development, redevelopment or expansion that abuts a public street or highway right-of-way shall be buffered as provided in Table 4.5.3. 
B.  Conflicts with Overhead Lines. 
1.  When the street buffer is within 20 feet of overhead utilities, small maturing trees must be substituted for the required large maturing tree. 
2.  Substitutions must be two for one and be planted at either 25 or 50 feet separation. 
3.  Substitutions must meet large maturing tree size specifications. 
Table 4.5.3.  Minimum Street Buffer Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.5.9. - Standards for Buffers. 
A.  Location. Buffer shall be located subject to the standards listed below. 
1.  Perimeter of Parcels. Buffers shall be located along the perimeter of a lot or parcel, and may be located within a public right-of-way. 
2.  Yards or Setbacks. Buffers may be located within required front, side, side corner or rear yards or setbacks. 
3.  Public Rights-of-way. If the buffer is to be located within a public right-of-way, the City Engineer must determine that the plantings will not adversely impact utilities, roadway expansions or traffic flow. 
B.  Credit for Required Landscaping. Planting in a right-of-way may account for not more than 25% of total landscape requirements. 
C.  Trees, Shrubs and Ornamental Grasses. Trees, shrubs or ornamental grasses planted to form hedges shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The plant material shall be an evergreen species and a minimum of 18 inches in height when measured immediately after planting; 
2.  The plant material shall be planted no further apart than 30 inches on center. 
D.  Exemption. Parcels zoned RE10, RE5, RE1, RT, SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, SFR4, RMF1 and RMF2 are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.5.10. - Planting Specifications. 
A.  Ground Cover. Vegetated ground cover shall be provided throughout the buffer area except in undisturbed natural vegetation areas. If grass is used, it shall be of a species normally grown as permanent laws in the vicinity of the City. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded. 
B.  Standards. All plant material shall meet American Association of Nurserymen standards. 
C.  Standards for Large Maturing and Small Maturing Trees and Shrubs and Ornamental Grasses. All planted material shall comply with the standards listed in Table 4.5.4. 
Table 4.5.4.  Standards for Large Maturing and Small Maturing Trees and Shrubs and Ornamental Grasses 

 
D.  Replacement. All plantings, including trees, shrubs and ground cover, required by this Article or an approved development approval that die or are destroyed must be replaced. 
E.  Standards for Planting. See Section 4.6.15. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 12-53, § 6, 12-4-12) 
Section 4.5.11. - Placement, Installation and Irrigation. 
A.  Placement. To achieve a more natural appearance, plantings should not be evenly spaced or planted in a straight line, but should be staggered or grouped together. Plantings shall be distributed throughout the length of the buffer. 
B.  Installation. Plantings shall be installed consistent with current nursery industry standards. See Section 4.6.15. 
C.  Support. Plant materials shall be properly supported with wires, guy wires, stakes, and similar devices to ensure survival. Support devices shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement and shall be removed 12 months after installation. 
D.  Topsoil. Topsoil, or appropriate substitute, shall be provided to a depth sufficient to ensure plant survival, in accordance with current nursery standards. 
E.  Watering or Irrigation. All buffer areas shall be provided with means of providing water with one of the following two options: 
1.  A permanent built-in irrigation system; or 
2.  A temporary watering system (hoses, water tank truck, etc.), which provides sufficient water, to ensure that installed plants can survive adequately on their own once established. 
F.  Existing Vegetation. Preservation of existing stands of natural vegetation and mature trees is a highly desirable aspect of site development and encouraged whenever and wherever existing vegetation will assist in meeting the requirements of this Article. 
1.  Use as a Buffer. As noted in the Table 4.5.2, undisturbed natural vegetation can serve as an adequate buffer and can eliminate the need for any supplemental vegetation within the buffer areas. 
2.  Mature Trees. Mature trees are valuable community assets and should be saved whenever possible. Where existing hardwood or pine trees, measuring at least four inches in diameter as measured 4½ feet above the ground are used in the buffer or landscaped area, each tree will count double toward meeting buffer tree requirements. 
3.  Protection during Construction. Protection of all existing vegetation utilized to comply with the requirements of this Article shall be provided as required in Section 4.6.13. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 3-25-08) 
Section 4.5.12. - Responsibility for Installation and Maintenance. 
The property owner is responsible for installation and maintenance of all buffer, landscape and screening areas. 
Section 4.5.13. - Timing of Buffer Installation. 
Required buffers shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  New Development, Redevelopment and Expansion. 
1.  Installation and Planting Plan Required. Unless otherwise provided herein, all buffers and plant materials shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Installation shall include submission to the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement and the City Arborist of a planting or landscape plan indicating the dimensions, category and option of buffer installation. Installation shall be verified by the City Arborist prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a final building inspection being performed. 
2.  Change in Zoning. Buffer plans shall be submitted with any application for rezoning, as provided in Section 4.5.5. 
3.  Delay in Planting. Property owners or developers may submit a "Request for Delay Affidavit" to allow for planting installation to occur at a time which better coincides with normal planting season of November 1 st to March 30 th . Unless the City Arborist approves the request, plantings shall be installed as required by this Article, a development approval or as otherwise provided by these land development regulations. 
B.  Exemption. Any property zoned UPT or CRD is exempt from the front, side and rear buffering requirements of this Article. This exemption shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Standards for screening and landscaping in parking lots as provided in Section 4.6.11; and 
2.  Screening required for trash areas, dumpsters and outdoor storage areas as provide in Section 4.2.1. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 4.5.14. - Administrative Modifications. 
A.  Modifications. Modifications to the standard of this Article may be granted by the City Arborist if the one or more of the following circumstances exist on the proposed building site: 
1.  Natural land characteristics such topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this Article; or 
2.  Innovation buffering or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect. 
B.  Application. The developer shall submit sufficient documentation to the City Arborist a minimum of 60 days in advance of requesting issuance of a site development permit. 
C.  Response. The City Arborist shall make a written response to the application within 15 working days, or as otherwise approved by the Director. 
Section 4.5.15. - Variances. 
A variance from the requirements and standards of this Article may be granted consistent with Article 11 of Chapter 10. 
Section 4.5.16. - Enforcement and Administration. 
A.  Administration. The administration and enforcement of this Article shall be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 12 and all other applicable requirements of this UDO. 
B.  Site Plans. All site plans submitted with rezoning applications shall depict the location and dimensions of all required buffers. 
C.  Appeals. Any appeal from a decision or interpretation regarding this Article shall be consistent with the requirements of Article 11 of Chapter 10. 
ARTICLE 6. - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT 

Section 4.6.1. - Findings and Statement Of Purpose. 
A.  Findings. 
1.  Columbus, Georgia is situated in an area covered with a wide variety of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs which are a vital part of the heritage passed to us by nature and our forefathers; 
2.  Trees are recognized to be a valued asset providing a healthier and more beautiful environment in which to live; 
3.  Trees are economically beneficial in attracting new residents and tourists; 
4.  Tree preservation enhances the value and marketability of property and, thereby, promotes the stability of residential neighborhoods making them more livable and desirable, and thus helps prevent the emergence of blighted neighborhoods, slum conditions and urban sprawl; 
5.  Trees aid in preventing erosion, storm drainage, siltation of streams and reservoirs, and flash flood damage; and 
6.  Trees are valuable in providing shade and cooling effects, and in preventing air, noise, and visual pollution. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to: 
1.  Make the City a more attractive and healthy environment in which to live, and better control stormwater runoff, noise, glare, heat, and soil erosion; 
2.  Provide the necessary information to facilitate development project design, plan review, and enforcement processes in order that the standards and requirements of this Article are administered in the most effective, efficient and economical manner; 
3.  Establish and maintain the maximum sustainable amount of tree cover on public and private lands in the City; 
4.  Maintain City trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition; and 
5.  Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest. 
Section 4.6.2. - Official Tree. 
The Muskogee Crape Myrtle shall be the official tree of the City. 
Section 4.6.3. - Definitions. 
Definitions relating to tree preservation and replacement are provided in Chapter 13. 
Section 4.6.4. - City Arborist. 
A.  Designation. The Urban Forestry and Beautification Division Manager, or designee, shall serve as the City Arborist. 
B.  Duties. The duties of the City Arborist shall include those duties listed below. 
1.  Review and Approval. Review and approve or disapprove all plans required by Articles 5, 6 and 7 of this Chapter. 
2.  Variances. 
(A)  Consider and act upon requests for variances as provided in Section 4.6.18. 
(B)  The City Arborist shall take such action within 15 days of receipt of any such plans or requests for variance. 
3.  Inspections and Compliance. Conduct such inspections as are necessary to see that compliance with the applicable Articles of this UDO is achieved and maintained. 
4.  Trees in Public Areas. Direct, regulate and control the planting, maintenance and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in any public area of the City. 
5.  Violations. Make cases for violations of applicable portions of this UDO, to issue summons directed to the offenders and to appear in the Recorder's Court or such other court as shall have jurisdiction of the matter. 
6.  Preparation of Standards and Specifications. Produce tree planting and maintenance standards and specifications to specify planting methods, maintenance and location of trees within public rights-of-way, in parks and in public places within the City. 
7.  Street Trees. Prepare a street tree planting plan and program along all major arterial streets, collector streets, and publicly owned spaces, including the preparation of detailed plans and specifications for all areas covered by the tree planting plan. 
8.  Cooperation with Other Agencies. 
(A)  Cooperation. Cooperate closely with and assist the Public Services Department, the Planning Department, the Department of Inspections and Codes, the Engineering Department, the Parks and Recreation Department, the Development Authority and the Downtown Development Authority, and all other city departments of this government in a program to protect and maintain existing trees and green areas and all city-owned and recreational lands and properties. 
(B)  Review and Comment. Review and comment on the proposed landscaping plans of all recreation lands and other public properties within the City. 
9.  Proposed Landscape Plans. Review and make recommendations or comments on all proposed landscaping or development plans of any department of the City, or any plans of whatever nature which propose the planting or removal of any public trees. 
10.  Monitoring. Monitoring the impact of the requirements of this Article and Article 7 through canopy studies, tree inventories and other methods, and report on the same to the Tree Board and Council. 
11.  Recommendations to Mayor and Council. 
(A)  Recommendations. Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding the planting, maintenance and protection of trees on public property. 
(B)  Special Matters or Questions. Consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend on any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.6.5. - Tree Board. 
See Chapter 9, Article 2. 
Section 4.6.6. - Applicability. 
The standards of this Article shall apply to any development, redevelopment, alteration or expansion as indicated below. 
A.  Compliance by Development. All sites proposed for development, other than mere renovation of an existing building, shall comply with the requirements of this Article. 
B.  Expansions or Additions. 
1.  Sites Two Acres or Less. 
(A)  Compliance. On sites two acres or smaller, additions or expansions greater than 5,000 square feet shall comply with the standards of this Article. 
(B)  Cumulative Effect. The standards shall apply to additions cumulatively totaling more than 5,000 square feet since the effective date of the Tree Protection Ordinance (June 4, 2002). 
2.  Sites Greater than Two Acres. 
(A)  Additions or Expansion. On sites greater, than two acres, additions or expansions greater than 10,000 square feet shall comply with the standards of this Article. 
(B)  Cumulative Effect. The standards shall apply to additions cumulatively totaling more than 10,000 square feet since the effective date of the original Tree Protection ordinance (June 4, 2002)." 
C.  Application of Tree Density Unit Requirements. 
1.  Any site or development which falls under the provisions of this Article by virtue of additions or expansions as defined in this subsection shall be required to comply with the applicable TDU requested as established hereafter only and without regard to any specific placement of trees contained in Section 4.6.10 regarding parking areas and Section 4.6.11 regarding perimeter plantings. 
2.  To determine the required number of TDUs that are required by this Article, two options are available. 
(A)  Option 1. Calculate the total surface area of any proposed new impervious surface or improvements and plant new trees sufficient to meet the required TDUs for that area. Existing trees elsewhere on the site shall be excluded in the calculation of TDUs. 
(B)  Option 2. Calculate required TDUs for entire site area according to zoning classification. Existing trees on the site may be counted to achieve required TDUs. 
D.  Planned Development Districts. All planned developments shall comply with the requirements of this Article. 
1.  Compliance. For planned developments, including the operation clearing and grading, the owner shall be required to follow at a minimum the standards set forth herein and the standards for stabilization relating to erosion control as set forth in the Section 8.3.2 of this UDO. 
2.  Time of Plantings. Planting of materials shall not be required until a Certificate of Occupancy is requested for the developed parcels and at that time only the plantings for each developed parcel should be required. 
3.  Completion of Planting. Plantings shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or performance of a final building inspection. 
4.  Intent. The intent of this subsection is to ensure that proper plantings are established for each use as well as to provide for the appropriate timing of plant installation, consistent with the requirements of Section 4.6.15.A regarding tree planting standards, Section 4.6.15.B regarding planting standards and specifications, and Section 4.5.13.A.3 regarding delayed plantings. 
E.  Redevelopment. Redevelopment of a site shall require compliance with the requirements of Articles 5 and 6 of this Chapter. 
1.  Definition. For the purposes of this Article, redevelopment is defined as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Demolition of an existing building and rebuilding on the site; 
(B)  Expansion of the gross square feet of the buildings or a sites physical development by 50 percent or greater; or 
(C)  An expansion of the gross square feet of buildings or a sites physical development totaling more than 50 percent since the effective date of the original Tree Protection Ordinance (June 4, 2002). 
2.  Redevelopment. Any site or development subject to this Article due to redevelopment as specified herein shall be required only to comply with the applicable TDU requirements. TDU requirements shall not include any specified placement of trees contained in Section 4.6.10 regarding parking areas and lots or Section 4.6.11 regarding perimeter plantings. 
F.  Applicability to Public Land. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all public entities and owners of public property within the City and it shall be unlawful for the owners to fail to comply with all provisions and requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 4.6.7. - Tree Density Unit Requirements. 
The calculations for determining TDU requirements are provided in this Section. Compliance with the tree density unit standards is required, whether or not a site supported trees prior to development. 
A.  Achieving Tree Density Units. The TDUs required by this Article may be achieved by the following: 
1.  Counting existing trees to be preserved; 
2.  Planting new trees; or 
3.  Combination of preservation and new plantings. 
B.  Formula for Calculation of Density. The formula for determining total tree density units is indicated below: 

 
1.  Total Tree Density Units Requirements for a Site. The Total Tree Density Unit (TTDU) requirement for a site is the minimum Tree Density Units (TDU) required to be maintained on a developed site. 
(A)  Calculation. This number is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by the appropriate Tree Density Unit (TDU) number for the applicable zoning classification. 
(B)  Site Acreage. This number is determined by starting with the total area of the parcel of land on which the project is located. 
(C)  Exclusions. Excluded from the site acreage is the area of any utility easement and pond or lake and dam over one acre in area. 
2.  Existing Tree Density Units. Existing Tree Density Units ETDU is the density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. 
(A)  Calculation. The ETDU is calculated by converting the diameter of individual existing trees to density factor units as indicated in Tables 4.6.1 and 4.6.2. 
(B)  Exclusions. Trees that exist in any utility easements cannot be counted toward compliance with tree density requirements. 
Table 4.6.1.  Tree Density Unit Value for Small Maturing Preserved Trees 1 

 
Table 4.6.2.  Tree Density Unit Value for Large Maturing Preserved Trees 

 
3.  Replacement Tree Density Units. Replacement Tree Density Units (RTDU) is the density of new trees to be planted on a site. 
(A)  Calculation. The RTDU is calculated by subtracting the ETDU from the TTDU. The density factor credit for each caliper size of replacement or new trees is shown in Table 4.6.3. 
(B)  Exclusion. Trees that are replanted within any utility easement or street right of way cannot be counted toward meeting tree density requirements. 
Table 4.6.3.  Tree Density Unit Standards for Planted Trees—Caliper Size to Unit Value for Trees Normally Sold by Caliper Size 

 
C.  Minimum Caliper Sizes. 
1.  Small Maturing Trees. Minimum caliper size for small maturing tree species is 1.5 inches at a minimum height of five (5) feet tall immediately after planting. 
2.  Large Maturing Trees. Minimum caliper size for large maturing tree species is 2 inches at a minimum height of eight (8) feet tall immediately after planting. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.6.8. - Estate, Low and Medium Density Single-family Residential Lots and Subdivisions. 
A.  Tree Protection and Tree Planting Plan Required. 
1.  Plan Required. A tree protection and tree planting plan shall be submitted, shall be approved and shall comply with the appropriate tree density standards of density units per acre which corresponds to the zoning classifications as provided in Table 4.6.4. 
2.  Approval and Permits. The plan shall be approved prior to either of the following: 
(A)  The issuance of a site development permit for any property to be developed as a residential subdivision within a residential estate or single-family residential zoning district; or 
(B)  A building permit for any lot that is not located within in a previously approved single-family residential subdivision for which a tree protection or tree planting plan has been approved. 
Table 4.6.4.  Tree Density Standards for Estate, Low Density Residential and Medium Density Residential Zoning Districts 

 
B.  Tree Protection and Planting. Trees must be protected and preserved in compliance with the provisions of Section 4.6.12 and must be planted in compliance with Section 4.6.15. 
C.  Required Species. Trees planted as required by this Article shall be a species listed on Table 4.6.5 at the end of this Article. 
D.  Trees Included in TDU Calculations. All trees located within any required zoning buffer or on any individual lot as provided hereafter or by any other legal requirement shall be counted in calculating if a property complies with the required TDU standard. 
E.  Individual Trees for Residential Lots. Individual trees for residential lots shall be provided as required in this subsection. 
1.  Lots of 7,500 or More Square Feet. Every residential lot containing 7,500 or more square feet area shall have a minimum of two trees located, subject to the standards listed below. 
(A)  Location. At least one tree must be located between the front set back line and the right-of-way. 
(B)  Type. At least one tree shall be a large maturing tree. 
2.  Lots of Less than 7,500 Square Feet. Every residential lot containing less than 7,500 square feet of surface area shall have a minimum of one tree, and the tree may be located anywhere on a lot. 
3.  Inclusion as Part of Required Tree Density. These individual trees per lot may be counted as part of the required tree density units per acre for the development. However, such trees may be an additional requirement if the appropriate units per acre requirement are located elsewhere on the site. 
4.  Application to Developer or Home Builder. The minimum tree per lot requirement shall apply to the developer or homebuilder, whoever is responsible for obtaining the building permit for the individual lot. 
5.  Application Only to Home Builder. If the requirement for tree installation is to be applied to the home builder, the developer will be given credit on the whole project for the trees which must be planted on lots to be built upon at a later date. 
F.  Planting Delay. In the event final planting of trees required by this Section or other required plantings cannot be accomplished on a single-family residential lot within a previously approved residential subdivision due to the planting season, inclement weather, or other extenuating circumstances and the owner desires to occupy the dwelling prior to planting, the owner or developer may submit a request for delay affidavit to the City Arborist. 
G.  Residential Lots Greater than Two Acres. If a single-family residential home is constructed on any lot or tract zoned as provided in Section 4.6.8, the tree density units required for the site shall be applicable to two acres irrespective of the greater size of said lot or tract upon which said home is built. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 12-53, § 7, 12-4-12) 
Section 4.6.9. - All Other Residential Lots, Subdivisions, Commercial and Industrial Developments. 
A.  Tree Protection and Tree Planting Plan Required. 
1.  Plan Required. Prior to the issuance of a site development permit for any property to be developed within any zoning classification other than the low and medium density single-family residential lots and subdivisions as provided in Section 4.6.9, a tree protection and/or tree planting plan shall be submitted and shall be approved in compliance with the standards of this Article, prior to the issuance of a site development permit. 
2.  Minimum Tree Unit Density. The plan shall be based upon a tree unit density requirement of ten density units per acre. 
B.  Inclusion of Certain Trees. All trees required by any required zoning buffer or perimeter trees and trees required to be planted in any parking lot as provided in this Article or by any other legal requirement shall be counted in calculating whether a property complies with the required TDU standard. 
C.  Tree Protection and Planting. Trees that are included as part of compliance with minimum TDU standards must be protected and preserved in compliance with the provisions of Section 4.6.12 and must be planted in compliance with Section 4.6.15 of this Article. 
D.  Required Species. Trees planted as required by this Article shall be a species listed on Table 4.6.5. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.6.10. - Parking Areas. 
A.  Lots One and one-half Acres or Less. Trees within parking areas are not required. However, a minimum of 70 percent of the required TDUs for a lot shall be either retained or planted, as the case may be, in the following: 
1.  The front or side yards of said lots; or 
2.  Adjacent to the City roadways. 
B.  Lots Larger than One and one-half Acres with not more than 20 Parking Spaces. Landscaping and trees in parking areas may be provided in landscaping islands or medians as provided in Section 4.6.10. Landscaping and trees in a parking area are not mandatory so long as every parking space is within 60 feet or less from a perimeter or "street" tree, or other large maturing tree retained or planted on the development or lot. 
C.  Lots Larger than One and one-half Acres with more than 20 Parking Spaces. Landscaping shall be provided in landscape islands or interior linear landscape medians. 
1.  Location. Landscaping islands shall be placed so that no line of more than 16 adjacent (side by side) parking spaces exists. 
2.  Protection. All landscaping islands and medians shall be installed with raised curbs or wheel stops, however the use of at-grade planting areas in parking lots to promote storm water runoff treatment and to supplement irrigation needs is encouraged. 
3.  Interior Linear Landscape Medians. Interior linear landscape medians may be provided within parking lots. 
(A)  Minimum Width. There shall be at least eight feet width, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
(B)  Minimize Planting Area Size. Each tree planted in an interior landscape island is required to have a minimum of 200 square feet of planting area. 
(C)  Installation of Landscape End Islands. When the landscape median extends to the end of a parking bay, a contiguous median end island, perpendicular to the landscape median, is required. 
(D)  Combination Swales and Planting Strips. Combination drainage swale/planting strips are permitted, in lieu of curbed and sloped island, provided that adequate drainage is provided for the chose species. 
4.  Interior Landscape Islands. Interior landscape islands may be provided within parking lots and other paved areas. 
(A)  Minimum Size. Each tree planted in an end island is required to have a minimum of 200 square feet of planting area, with a minimum width of at least 8 feet in one direction, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
(B)  Additional Trees. If a landscape issued contains more than one tree, at least 80 square feet of planting space shall be added for each additional tree. 
(C)  Contiguity. The landscape end islands may be contiguous with an interior landscape median or a perimeter planting strip. 
5.  Landscape End Islands. Landscape end islands shall be provided at the end of a parking bay. 
(A)  Minimum Size. Each tree planted in an end island is required to have a minimum of 200 square feet of planting area, with a minimum length equal to the length of the adjoining parking space, and a minimum width of at least 8 feet in one direction, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
(B)  Additional Trees. If a landscape island contains more than one tree, at least 80 square feet of planting space shall be added for each additional tree. 
(C)  Contiguity. The landscape end islands may be contiguous with an interior landscape median or a perimeter planting strip. 
6.  Required Plantings. 
(A)  Single Row Parking. Interior and terminal landscape islands for a single row of parking spaces shall be planted with a least one large maturing tree. 
(B)  Double Row Parking. Interior or terminal islands for a double row of parking spaces shall contain not less than two large maturing trees. 
7.  Maximum Separation Distances. 
(A)  Maximum Separation for Large Maturing Trees. Large maturing trees must be planted or retained within the landscape medians or islands so that each parking space is 80 feet or less from a tree in an interior planting area, median or island, or 60 feet or less from a perimeter or "street" tree, or other large maturing tree retained or planted on the development. 
(B)  Minimum Area. The minimum unpaved landscape area per tree within a landscaping island shall be 200 square feet with a minimum dimension of 8 feet. 
(C)  Exemption for Overhead Utility Lines. Small maturing trees may be substituted for large maturing trees in any landscape median or island if a tree will be planted within 20 feet of an overhead utility line. 
(D)  Exemption for Tree Save and Natural Areas. If significant tree save areas or natural areas, or planned alternatives, which exceed the requirements of this Article as to numbers of trees, or spacing distances exist within a parking area, the City Arborist may make such exceptions to these requirements, as deemed appropriate at their sole discretion. 
8.  Tree Protection Standards. 
(A)  Curbs and Wheel Stops. As a protective measure, trees shall be planted at least three feet, from any curb or wheel stop. 
(B)  Vehicle Overhangs. As a protective measure, when landscape areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces. 
9.  Landscaping of Islands and Medians. 
(A)  Minimum Landscape Requirements. All landscape islands and medians within parking lots shall be 100 percent landscaped with the following: 
(1)  Large maturing trees as required in this Article; 
(2)  Evergreen shrubs, not to exceed 30" in height at maturity; 
(3)  Ground cover, excluding material that requires mowing; 
(4)  Small maturing trees as provided in this Article; 
(5)  Mulch; or 
(6)  Flowers in mulched beds in the area within three feet of the base of a tree. 
(B)  Grass. Grass may be used in landscape medians and islands so long as it stops at least three feet from the base of a tree. 
(C)  Pedestrians. Pedestrian traffic through landscape medians and islands should be directed away from the critical root zones of trees and toward appropriate pathways through appropriate landscaping. 
(D)  Medians. The same planting requirements as provided herein shall apply to medians in parking lots. 
10.  Pre-planting Preparation of Compacted Soil. All landscape islands and medians where trees, shrubbery and other vegetation will be planted shall be prepared as listed below. 
(A)  Uncompacted Soil. All areas shall be prepared to a uniform depth of two and one-half feet of uncompacted soil. 
(B)  Final Soil. The final soil in the landscape islands and medians shall be obtained on site or imported from a suitable source. 
(C)  Dumping and Other Wastes. Dumping of construction debris, trash, concrete residue, paint residue or other items toxic to trees and plants shall not be allowed in landscape islands and medians. 
(D)  Gravel and Stone. Gravel, stone, or other impervious material greater than one inch in diameter shall not be allowed in the landscape islands or in a landscape median within an eight feet radius of a tree planted in an interior linear landscape median. Gravel, stone or other impervious material not greater than one inch in diameter may be used as mulch. 
(E)  Site Lighting. Site lighting standards should be coordinated for new planting locations or avoided in planting islands for required trees. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Multilevel or Covered Parking. Multilevel or covered parking areas are exempt from the requirements of subparagraphs A through C of this Section. 
2.  Shipping and Loading Areas. 
(A)  Exemption for Areas of Truck Traffic. The provisions of this Section relating to landscape medians, landscape islands and maximum distance between parking spaces and trees shall not apply to areas used principally for motor vehicle, boat or mobile home sales, storage or display lots, and loading and shipping docks and areas of heavy truck traffic. These areas shall be clearly delineated to provide separation employee and customer parking areas. 
(B)  Compliance with Other Standards. All other requirements of this Article, including but not limited to perimeter planting and tree density requirements for the whole development, shall apply to such exempted areas. 
Section 4.6.11. - Perimeter Plantings. 
In all developments and substantial improvements on parcels excepted by Article 5 of this Chapter, other than areas zoned UPT and CRD, the standards listed below shall apply. 
A.  Continuous Perimeter Planting Strip. A continuous perimeter planting strip is required along the perimeter of a property and is subject to the standards listed below. 
1.  Minimum Width. The perimeter planting strip shall be a minimum width of 10 feet. 
2.  Location. Perimeter planting strips may occur within required buffers or yards. 
3.  Minimum Number of Trees. The minimum number of trees required in a perimeter planting strip shall be one large maturing tree for every 50 linear feet of perimeter or portion thereof or one small maturing tree for every 30 linear feet of perimeter or portion thereof. 
(A)  Combination of Trees. If a small maturing tree is planted next to a large maturing tree. The maximum distance between the two trees shall be 30 feet, subject to the grouping provision of this Section. 
(B)  Existing Trees. Existing trees to be preserved in the landscape strip may count toward perimeter planting. 
(C)  Minimum Percentage of Trees. At least 50 percent of trees in the perimeter planting strip must consist of large maturing trees. 
(D)  Overhead Utility Lines. A large maturing tree shall not be planted within 20 feet of an overhead utility line. 
4.  Grouping of Trees. Trees may be grouped or spaced to allow sight corridors. In the event of trees are grouped or spaced, a portion of the grouped trees may be planted inward of the perimeter planting strip if necessary to maintain a minimum distance between trees of 20 feet. 
5.  Trees within a Right-of-way. Where evenly spaced street trees exist within a public right-of-way, planted trees should be staggered to prevent conflict with existing trees and accommodate the full potential growth of the trees. 
6.  Minimum Planting Area. Each tree planted in a perimeter planting strip shall have a minimum of 200 square feet of planting area that may not be encroached upon by parking spaces or driveway surfaces. 
7.  Additional Areas of Application. The requirements of this Section shall apply to the portions of those low and medium density single-family residential lots and subdivisions specified in Section 4.6.8 when a subdivision or lot abuts the right-of-way of a public freeway, arterial or collector street. 
B.  Stormwater Detention and Retention Facilities. In addition to the requirements this Section, a visual screen shall separate and screen all stormwater detention or retention facilities adjacent to a public street or right-of-way and any adjoining or contiguous property. The visual screen shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Minimum Height. The visual screen shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height within 24 months after planting. 
2.  Materials. The visual screen may be formed through creation of a planted hedge, wall, earth berm or combination thereof. 
3.  Berms. When using an earth berm, the slope shall not exceed three to one with a maximum crown width of two feet. The berm shall be planted with turf or other landscaping materials. 
4.  Location within Required Perimeter Planting Strip. The visual screen may be included in a required perimeter planting strip. 
C.  Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zoned Areas. All provisions of this Article apply to all nonresidential uses on parcels zoned for residential purposes, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Clubhouses; 
2.  Convents and monasteries; 
3.  Places of worship; 
4.  Public uses including buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of government such as schools, libraries, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations; 
5.  Public, private and parochial schools; 
6.  Recreational and meeting facilities constructed in connection with a residential development or owned and operated by a neighborhood association; and 
7.  Utility substations and wireless communication facilities. 
Section 4.6.12. - Tree Protection and Planting Plan Requirements. 
A.  Tree Protection and Planting Plan Required. All applications for site development permits shall be accompanied by a tree protection and planting plan drawn to a standard scale and size that includes the information listed below. 
1.  Tree and Root Zone Protection. A tree and root protection zone plan for: 
(A)  All existing trees on the public right-of-way; 
(B)  All trees to be retained for credit under any of the provisions of this Article; and 
(C)  TDU and any applicable parking lot or perimeter planting requirements and attainment. 
2.  Planting Plan. A planting plan for all trees required to be planted under any of the requirements of this Article on public and private property. Plans that are only for required street planting may be in written form. This plan shall be approved prior to construction where street trees may be affected. 
3.  Inclusion on Other Plans. A required tree protection and planting plan may be included on other required plans. 
B.  Tree Protection and Planting Plan for Subdivisions. A plan may be in narrative form with sketch sufficient information to identify tree save areas and how the project will meet the requirements of this Article. 
1.  Residential Subdivisions. For residential subdivisions, a copy of this plan shall be forwarded to the Building Inspections and Code Division. 
2.  Identification of TDUs. All proposed site plans for any development for which a plan has been approved shall make reference to the specified number of TDUs or trees for that lot. The site plan also shall make reference to the builder's acknowledgement to comply with these previously imposed requirements. 
C.  Tree Replacement and Protection. When trees retained or planted as required by this Article die or are removed for any reason except in single-family residential lots, the trees must be replaced during the next suitable planting season. 
1.  Replacement. Dead or removed trees shall be replaced in a manner, quantity and size agreed upon by the owner and the City Arborist. 
2.  Failure to Agree. If the developer and Arborist cannot agree on replacement, then the Tree Board shall make the determination. 
3.  Appeal. The right of appeal by any aggrieved party shall occur as provided in Section 4.6.18. 
D.  Tree Growth. Trees shall be allowed to grow to their natural height and form. Topping of any tree necessary to attain compliance with any provision of this Article is prohibited. 
E.  Final Certification of Compliance. At the time a tree protection and planting plan is submitted, the applicant must identify a party who shall track and submit periodic reports and a final certification of compliance. The party shall be either: 
1.  The City Arborist; or 
2.  A registered landscape architect, registered civil engineer, International Society of Arboriculture-approved arborist or registered forester, on a list approved by the City Arborist. 
F.  Removal of protected trees. 
1.  It shall be a violation of this Article for any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, to cut down, remove, damage or destroy, or shall authorize the cutting down, removal, damage, or destruction of any protected tree, as defined in Section 13.1.1 hereof, or shall commit any act or authorize the commission of any act which physically removes a protected tree or causes a tree to die, such as damage inflicted upon the root system by heavy machinery, chemicals or paving, changing the natural grade above the root system and tree damage permitting infection or pest infestation, unless such removal is specifically permitted in accordance with paragraph (2) below. 
2.  Any Beautification Plan Tree or Public Protected Tree or Exceptional Specimen Tree may only be cut with permission of the City Arborist or in the event of his denial, the Tree Board. Any Beautification Plan Tree or Public Tree which poses imminent danger to the public health, welfare or safety or any tree that needs to be removed on an emergency basis to restore public utility service may be removed with specific permission, authorization and approval from either the City Arborist, the Public Works Director, City Manager, Deputy City Manager, Mayor, Chief of Police or Chief of Fire and EMS. 
(Ord. No. 19-013, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Section 4.6.13. - Tree Protection During Construction. 
The following standards shall apply to trees proposed to be preserved for credit toward meeting the minimum required Tree Density Units on a property. 
A.  Tree and Root Protection Zone. The root system within the dripline is the critical root zone. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. 
1.  Tree Protection Area. The tree protection area shall include the not less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree or group of trees. The tree protection area may be changed with prior approval from the City Arborist. 
2.  Utility and Grading Plans. 
(A)  Tree Protection Area. Layout of the project site utility and grading plans shall avoid disturbance in the tree protection area. 
(B)  Trenching. Trenching shall not be allowed within tree protection areas, unless prior approval is received from the City Arborist. 
3.  Prohibited Activities. 
(A)  Construction Site Activities. Construction site activities, including but not limited to parking, materials storage, concrete washout, and burn-hole placement are prohibited within a tree protection area. 
(B)  Soil Compaction. Soil compaction is prohibited within a tree protection area. 
4.  Root Disturbance. Root disturbance due to cuts or fill shall not be allowed within a tree protection area. All exposed roots one inch and greater in diameter at the edge of the tree protection area shall be pruned with a clean cut flush to the soil edge. 
5.  Erosion and Sediment Control. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed in a manner designed to prevent the accumulation of sediment within a tree protection area. 
B.  Protective Barriers. Tree protection devices shall be installed as shown on a tree protection plan or otherwise completely surround a tree protection area. 
1.  Installation of Fencing. All tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbing and construction process. The fencing shall not be removed until final landscaping is installed. 
2.  Fencing Materials. Tree protection fencing shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post, two rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. 
Section 4.6.14. - Additional Standards or Recommended Practices. 
A.  Extra TDU Credits. Any tree with a single-stem trunk diameter of 21.1 inches or greater at DBH that is shown on a tree protection plan will receive double the normal or standard tree density unit credit if appropriate tree protection standards are employed for a ground area equivalent to 1.5 feet in radius for each 1 inch in diameter at DBH. These trees must be represented on the plan by a circle the size of the protected root zone. 
B.  Signage. Posting "Tree Save Area" signs is recommended in addition to the required tree protection fencing. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with the tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
C.  Pruning. Pruning of tree limbs to provide clearance for equipment and materials or for any other reason shall be conducted in accordance with standard arboricultural practices. 
D.  Encroachment. If encroachment into a tree protection area occurs which causes irreparable damage to one or more trees, based on the assessment of the City Arborist, the damaged trees shall no longer count toward the required TDUs for the property and must be replaced. 
Section 4.6.15. - Tree Planting Standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all trees and shrubs proposed to be planted for credit toward meeting the minimum required TDUs on a property. 
A.  Plant Material Specifications. 
1.  Standard for Plant Materials. All plant material shall meet American Standard of Nursery Stock standards. 
2.  Survivability. Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
3.  Large Maturing Trees. Large maturing trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches immediately after planting. 
4.  Small Maturing Trees. Small maturing trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height and have a caliper of at least one and one-half inches immediately after planting. 
5.  Suitable Species. Table 4.6.5 contains a "Required Large Maturing and Small Maturing Tree Planting Lists" for suitable species choices. 
6.  Installation Adjacent to Utility Lines Prohibited. Large maturing tree species shall not be planted within 20 feet of overhead utility lines. 
7.  Replacement. All plantings that die or are destroyed must be replaced, except in single-family residential lots, during the next suitable planting season. Trees which are planted on single-family residential lots to meet the requirements of this Article must be alive and in good vigor at the time of the sale of the property, or the developer or builder who planted the tree shall replace the same during the next suitable planting season. 
B.  Planting Specifications and Standards. 
1.  Installation. Plantings shall be installed to current nursery industry standards. 
2.  Planting Hole. The diameter of the planting hole shall be a minimum of three times the diameter of the root ball. 
3.  Planting Hole Sidewalks. The planting hole sidewalls shall be scored or roughened to eliminate the smooth, slick surface caused by the shovel or auger. 
4.  Containerized Materials. If containerized material is to be planted, any circling roots shall be cut by slicing the root ball vertically from top to bottom in two to three well spaced lines around the root ball with a sharp knife. 
5.  Location of Root Ball. The root ball shall rest on undisturbed soil in the planting hole with the top of the root ball on level with the natural ground level or slightly raised. If slightly raised, the elevation will not exceed a height of two inches above the natural ground level. 
6.  Credit Not Applicable. Any tree planted with the top of the root ball below natural ground level shall not be counted towards the required TDUs for the property. 
7.  Soil. The soil used to backfill around the root ball shall not be compacted, and shall be native soil free of rocks, trash or any construction debris. 
8.  Stakes and Guy Wires. Stakes and guy wires should only be installed when absolutely necessary. Supporting devices shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement and shall be removed after 12 months. 
9.  Mulching of Trees. Mulch in the form of pine straw, pine bark or wood chips shall be evenly distributed over the planting hole to a settled depth of two inches. 
10.  Irrigation. A permanent or temporary irrigation system shall be installed to ensure that plants will survive the critical establishment period. 
11.  Out-of-season Planting. Out-of-season planting is discouraged. Property owners or developers may submit a "Request for Delay Affidavit" to allow for plant installation to occur at a time which better coincides with the normal planting season, normally considered to be November 1 st to March 31 st . 
Figure 4.6.1 

(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.6.16. - Alternative Compliance. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Article is to ensure that a minimum density of trees is maintained on all developed sites. Occasionally, compliance with this intent cannot be attained because a project site will not support the required density of trees. When the City Arborist makes a writing finding that the project site will not bear the required density of trees, two methods of compliance are acceptable: 
1.  Off-site planting at a location on public property or an appropriate conservation easement remote from the project site; or 
2.  Contributing to the Columbus, Georgia Tree Replacement Fund. 
B.  Standards for Alternative Compliance. The following standards have been established for administering these alternative compliance methods. 
1.  Review and Approval. The City Arborist must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance within 15 day of receipt of such requests. 
2.  Standards for Compliance. In no instance shall 100 percent of the required TDU be attained through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. 
3.  Permit Issuance. The land disturbance permit will only be issued after the City Arborist has approved the request and received the necessary documentation or funds. 
C.  Off-site Planting. If trees are to be planted at another location, the compliance with the standards listed below is required. 
1.  Location. The off-site location should be in the same area of the City as the project site and will be selected by joint consultation between the developer and the City Arborist. If they are unable to agree upon a mutually acceptable site, then the Tree Board will select the site. 
2.  Tree Planting Plan. A tree planting plan consistent with all applicable standards of this Article must be reviewed and approved by the City Arborist. 
3.  Required Plan Note. The following note must be shown on the approved plan: 
"A Tree Planting Plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the City Arborist within 30 days from the date of this land disturbance permit. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Release of this project is subject to approval of this plan as well as verification of the installation of the trees." 
D.  Tree Replacement Fund. As another method of alternative compliance, the City will accept donations to the City's Tree Replacement Fund. The donations shall be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property in the same area of the City as the project site. 
1.  Calculating Contribution Amounts. Contribution calculations are based on two-inch caliper replacement trees with a value of $220.00, representing the average size and cost of materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the City. 
2.  Minimum Contribution Formula. The formula for determining the total contribution is indicated below: 
Required Contribution = Density Factor Deficit (DFD)/.5 (Unit Value) × $220.00 (Replacement Value). 
Density Factor Deficit. The unit value that cannot be planted on the site. 
Unit Value. The unit value of a two inch caliper replacement tree. 
Replacement Value. $220.00 for trees planted in the City. 
Example Calculation. 
An example calculation to determine a required contribution is presented below. 
A 2.2 acre site has a required total tree density units (TTDU) standard of 22.0, an existing tree density Units (ETDU) OF 11.4, and can only accommodate replacement tree density units (RTDU) of 9.0. 
Determine the density unit deficit (DUD) using the formula: DUD=TTDU-ETDU-RTDU 
In this example, DFD = 22.0 - 11.4 - 9.0 = 1.6 
Determine the acceptable contribution amount as follows: 1.6 divided by .5 multiplied by $220.00 = $704.00 
E.  Fund Administration. The Urban Forestry and Beautification Division will administer the Columbus Tree Replacement Fund. A quarterly report shall be submitted to the City Manager showing amounts collected, amount spent, and the types and locations of trees planted. The report will be made available to the Mayor and Council upon their request. 
Section 4.6.17. - Inspections. 
A.  Certification and Inspections. 
1.  Inspections. Inspections shall be performed at any time during the development process, and from time to time, as determined by the City Arborist. The inspections shall be performed by the Arborist or designee, which may include officials of the Building Inspections and Code Division for single-family residential lots. 
2.  Final Approvals. Prior to the release of the certificate of occupancy, final plat approval or final building inspection, an inspection will be performed to assure compliance with the tree protection and planting plan. The inspection and report shall be made by either the City Arborist or designee or by an individual with the qualifications as provided in Section 4.6.4. 
(A)  Irrigation. Any required irrigation must be operational at this time. Hose bibs and other watering devices specified on the plans will be verified. 
(B)  Plantings. All plantings and trees retained for TDU credit will be inspected. 
(C)  Exception. Any certificate of occupancy or final building inspection may be granted prior to any required plantings having been fully installed if a "Request for Delay Affidavit" has been filed and approved by the Arborist. 
B.  Maintenance Inspection. Any planted materials that are dead or missing at the time of a maintenance inspection must be replaced by the responsible party. 
1.  City Arborist. The City Arborist shall provide the responsible party with a written evaluation of what trees need to be replaced and the time frame within which replacement is to occur. 
2.  Additional Monitoring. Any trees in a state of decline will be noted and subject to monitoring at later dates. If such trees die, they will become the responsibility of the current owner to replace. 
Section 4.6.18. - Variances and Appeals. 
A request for variance shall be filed subject to the requirements of this Section and of Article 11 of Chapter 10. 
A.  Administrative Variances. 
1.  Authority of City Arborist. The City Arborist shall have the authority to grant variances not to exceed 20 percent of the minimum or maximum standards of this Article. 
2.  Appeals from City Arborist Decision. Appeals of a decision made by the City Arborist shall be submitted to the Tree Board. 
B.  Other Variances. Variances in excess of the amount that can be granted by the City Arborist shall be submitted to the Tree Board. Variances to this Article shall be granted under the same procedures as provided in Article 11 of Chapter 10, excluding the notification of property owners, except that the Tree Board will be acting as the appellate body on all matters under this Article rather than the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Tree Board is granted the same powers for hearing appeals and granting variances involving this Article as the Board of Zoning Appeals is granted in Chapter 10. 
C.  Standards for Review. In addition to the standards for review contained in Article 11 of Chapter 10, the following standards shall be utilized for a variance from the requirements of this Article. 
1.  Public Health, Safety and Welfare. The granting of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to the public health, safety or welfare; be injurious to other property; or impair the purpose and intent of this Article. 
2.  Extraordinary Conditions. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question that would result in a particular hardship to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out. 
3.  Reasonable Use of Land. The strict application of this Article would deprive an applicant of reasonable use of the land, or would create an unnecessary hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience. 
4.  Special Circumstances. Any special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequently to the adoption or amendment of this Article. 
5.  Action or Variance Request. As applicable, the City Arborist or Tree Board may approve, modify or deny the requested adjustment or variance. The approval or modification shall be granted only if the Arborist or Board determines that approval of any adjustments would not be contrary to the intent of this Article and that literal enforcement of the above standards would be impractical and would result in unreasonable and unnecessary hardships. 
6.  Timely Decisions. The City Arborist or Tree Board shall act as expeditiously as possible on all requests for variance and appeals. 
(A)  City Arborist. The City Arborist shall act on all requests for variance with 15 days of receipt of the request. 
(B)  Tree Board. 
(1)  The Tree Board shall approve or reject any request for a variance or appeal from the decision of the City Arborist within 40 days after an application is filed. 
(2)  If a meeting of the Tree Board has not been scheduled within the next 30 days of the filing of a request for variance or appeal, the Chair shall call a meeting. 
(3)  The decision of the Board shall be issued within ten days following consideration of the request or appeal. 
(4)  Notification of all actions on requests for variance or appeal, whether by the Arborist or Tree Board, shall be forwarded to the applicant by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and posted in a conspicuous place, or in the office of the City Arborist. The notification shall be in the form of a short, concise statement of the action taken. 
(5)  Within 14 days after posting of a decision, but not thereafter, any decision of the City Arborist or Tree Board may be appealed by the applicant. The appeal of any decision by the City Arborist shall be submitted to the Tree Board and the appeal of any decision of the Tree Board shall be filed with the Clerk of Council for action by the Council of Columbus. 
(6)  The appeal to the Council of Columbus is a de novo appeal and the Council may affirm, modify or reverse the ruling of the Tree Board. 
Table 4.6.5  Required and Prohibited Tree Planting List 

 
(Ord. No. 12-53, § 8, 12-4-12) 
Section 4.6.19. - Enforcement and Administration. 
A.  Review of Tree Protection and Tree Planting Plans. 
1.  Review. The City Arborist shall review and approve or disapprove all tree protection plans and tree planting plans submitted as required by this Article. 
2.  Period for Review. The City Arborist shall review and approve or disapprove a plan within 15 working days after it is filed. 
3.  Issuance of Certificates and Permits. 
B.  Fast Track Projects. A site development permit, residential development permit, certificate of occupancy or building permit shall not be issued without the approval of the City Arborist signifying compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
1.  Cooperative Review. On any project, which the Planning Director determines to be a fast track, large economic development project, the Arborist shall work with the Community Project Team, the Development Authority, the developer and the company representatives to comply with the 15-day permit turn around time. 
2.  Status of Projects. These are special projects determined by the Columbus Consolidated Government, and it is intended for this action to be processed concurrent with all other permitting actions relating to a project in support of its fast track designation. 
C.  Revocation, Suspension or Voiding of Permits and Certificates. The City Arborist shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or void any site development permit, final inspection or building permit or to withhold any certificate of occupancy or approval of a final plat, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this Article or the provisions of the approved tree protection and planting plan for the site. The City Arborist's authority to suspend work on a site shall have the concurrence of the Director of the Department of Public Services. 
D.  Falsification of Information. It shall be unlawful to falsify any information contained in any application, plan or report required by this Article or this Chapter to tree preservation, protection, installation or similar action. If the City Arborist makes a written determination that a person has falsified any required application, plan or report, such person: 
1.  Shall not be permitted to certify compliance with this Chapter for a period of five years; 
2.  Shall submit and implement a revised tree protection and planting plan approved by the City Arborist; and 
3.  Shall be subject to a minimum fine of $500.00 for violation of this Section. 
E.  Penalty. The penalty for any violation of this Article shall be in accordance with the applicable portions of the City Code. Each day of any violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. Any action which results in the death or destruction of a public tree located on Columbus Consolidated Government property shall be subject to a fine in an amount equal to $100.00 for each inch of diameter at breast height or stump diameter if the tree is no longer present, up to a maximum fine of $1,000.00. All money collected from fines shall be deposited in the Tree Replacement Fund. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
ARTICLE 7. - ADDITIONAL TREE REQUIREMENTS 

Section 4.7.1. - Nuisances. 
A.  Public Nuisances. 
1.  Authority of City Arborist. The City Arborist has the authority to declare as a nuisance any tree or shrub or parts thereof growing on public or private property, and interfering or endangering the use of the public streets or sidewalks or obscuring sight distances and creating a traffic hazard on intersections or endangering the life, health, safety or property of the public. 
2.  Notification of Nuisance. The City Arborist shall notify in writing the owner or interested parties of such tree or shrub of the existence of the nuisance and give a 15-day period of time for contracting for correction or removal of the nuisance or for requesting a hearing. 
B.  Failure to Remove. 
1.  Hearing. If the owner or interested parties have not corrected or removed the nuisance or contracted for correction or removal of the nuisance within the 15 day period, the City Manager or designee shall hold a hearing not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days following the notice of the City Arborist. The hearing shall be schedule at a date and time certain, within the City. 
2.  Rights of Owner or Parties in Interest. The owner or parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice, to appear in person, or be represented by an attorney and give testimony at the public hearing, as to why compliance with the notice from the City Arborist has not been achieved. 
3.  Rules of Evidence. Rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not control in hearings before the City Manager or designee. 
C.  Determination of Nuisance. The City Manager or designee shall determine at the hearing, on the basis of the evidence presented, whether or not the tree or shrub is a nuisance to the public and the owner's responsibility therefore. 
1.  Issuance of Order. If the City Manager or designee determines that the tree or shrub is a nuisance, an order shall be issued, which shall be served upon the owner or parties in interest, requiring them to remove or correct the nuisance within 15 days. 
2.  Failure to Correct or Remove. If not corrected or removed within such period, the City Arborist shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost shall be assessed to the owner or interested parties. 
D.  Liens. 
1.  Lien Against Real Property. The cost of the correction or removal shall be a lien against the real property upon which the tree or shrub is or was situated. The lien shall be prepared and entered by the Finance Department and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Muscogee County Superior Court in the same manner which liens for costs for removal of weeds and other vegetation are filed. 
2.  Payment of Lien. The owner or parties in interest shall pay the full amount due on a lien to the Director of Finance of the City within 30 days of perfection of the lien. If the lien is not paid in full within 30 days of the perfection of such lien, the owner or parties in interest shall pay: 
(A)  Twenty-five percent of the total lien amount plus seven percent interest within 60 days of the perfection of the lien; and 
(B)  The remaining balance due on such lien to be paid in three equal annual installments with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed herein. 
3.  Sale or Conveyance of Real Property subject to a Lien. Should the property upon which a lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time, then the entire balance due on the lien shall be due and payable to the Director of Finance of the City. 
4.  Failure to Pay. Should the amount due on a lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the time for payment of the final annual installment provided in this Section, the amount shall continue as a lien together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum until paid in full. 
E.  Disease and Insect Infestation. 
1.  Authority of City Council. Council shall have the authority to insist that all property owners treat or allow the City to treat trees or shrubs suffering from transmittable diseases or insect infestations which are on private property but are affecting the health of public trees on public property. 
2.  Determination by City Arborist. If the City Arborist determines that disease or insect infestation warrants drastic action to curb its spread to healthy public trees, then the disease or infestation shall constitute a nuisance and the procedural requirements of Section 4.6.5 regarding a nuisance shall apply. 
F.  Emergencies. In case of emergencies, such as windstorms, or other disasters, or other imminent danger to the health, safety or property of the public, including but not limited to automotive and pedestrian traffic due to obstruction of public sidewalks, streets or sight distances, the requirements of Sections 4.7.4 and 4.7.5 shall be waived so that the requirements of this Article would not hamper private or public work to restore order to the City. This work to be done in accordance with emergency standards as outlined by the City Arborist. 
Section 4.7.2. - Enforcement and Administration. 
A.  Review of Tree Protection and Tree Planting Plans. 
1.  Review. The City Arborist shall review and approve or disapprove all tree protection plans and tree planting plans submitted as required by this Article. 
2.  Period for Review. The City Arborist shall review and approve or disapprove a plan within 15 working days after it is filed. 
3.  Issuance of Certificates and Permits. A site development permit, certificate of occupancy, or building permit shall not be issued without the approval of the City Arborist signifying compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
B.  Fast Track Projects. 
1.  Cooperative Review. On any project, which the City Manager determines to be a fast track, large economic development project, the Arborist will work with the Community Project Team, the Development Authority, the developer, and the company representatives to comply with the 15-day permit turn around time. 
2.  Status of Projects. These are special projects determined by the City, and it is intended for this action to be processed concurrent with all other permitting actions relating to a project in support of its fast track designation. 
C.  Revocation, Suspension or Voiding of Permits and Certificates. The City Arborist shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or void any site development permit, final inspection, or building permit or to withhold any certificate of occupancy or approval of a final plat, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this Article or the provisions of the approved Tree Protection and Planting Plan for the site. The City Arborist's authority to suspend work on a site must have the concurrence of the Director of the Department of Public Services. 
D.  Falsification of Information. It shall be unlawful to falsify any information contained in any application, plan or report required by this Article or this Chapter to tree preservation, protection, installation or similar action. If the City Arborist makes a written determination at a person has falsified any application, plan or report required herein, such person: 
1.  Shall not be permitted to certify compliance with this Chapter for a period of five years; 
2.  Shall submit and implement a revised tree protection and planting plan approved by the City Arborist; and 
3.  Shall be subject to a minimum fine of $500.00 for violation of this Section. 
E.  Penalty. The penalty for any violation Article shall be in accordance with the applicable portions of the City Code. Each day of any violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. Any action which results in the death or destruction of a public tree located on City property shall be subject to fine in an amount equal to $100.00 for each inch of diameter at breast height or stump diameter if tree is no longer present, up to a maximum fine of $1,000.00. All money collected from fines shall be deposited in the Tree Replacement Fund. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.7.3. - Injunctive Relief. 
A.  Civil Action. Whenever the City has reasonable cause to believe that any person, firm, corporation or other entity is violating this Chapter, or any term, condition or provision of an approved permit, it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Ordinance, institute a civil action in the name of the City for an injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the property. 
B.  Civil or Criminal Penalties. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this Section shall not relieve any party to such proceedings from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violation of this Chapter. 
Section 4.7.4. - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Trenching and Boring within the Critical Root Zone on City Property. Trenching within the critical root zone of any tree on City property shall be prohibited. The critical root zone is considered to be the root system within the dripline. Boring, auguring, or other alternative method may be employed that allows for the installation of underground utilities within the critical root zone but stays three feet or more below the surface of the ground. 
B.  Damage by City Trees . When, in the opinion of the City Arborist, roots of a tree on public property damage City curbs, gutters and sidewalks including the portions of driveways on public right-of-way, the City shall be responsible for appropriate corrective measures which are least damaging to the tree. In the event the portion of the driveway on public right-of-way must be repaired or replaced, the City Arborist shall make a report to the City Manager, Director of Public Works and the Risk Manager detailing the nature of such damage, and in such cases, the City Manager is authorized to approve repairs or replacement of such driveway portion on public right-of-way in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
C.  Required Permits. 
1.  Actions Affecting Public Trees. Any person or organization shall not take any of the following action to or upon any public trees as determined by the City Arborist unless previously approved in a site development permit or without first obtaining the proper permit from the City Arborist: 
(A)  Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage, remove, kill, or cause to be killed; 
(B)  Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root within the drip line; 
(C)  Place or spray with, any toxic chemical as listed in the maintenance standards; 
(D)  Fasten any rope, wire, sign, or other device; 
(E)  Remove or damage any guard devices placed to protect any tree; 
(F)  Conduct razing, removal or renovation of any structures if deemed by the City Arborist to be damaging to neighboring trees; 
(G)  Maintain a stationary fire or device which vaporizes noxious fumes deleterious to tree health; or 
(H)  Pave with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within four feet of a tree. 
2.  Topping of Public Trees. The topping of any City tree for any purpose, including sight clearance for billboards, is prohibited and a permit shall not be issued for such action. 
3.  Permit Fees. A permit fee of $35.00 shall be assessed for each permit and shall be applicable to the particular job as specified by the permit. 
4.  Permit for Removal of Trees on City Property. A request for a permit to remove trees on City property may be submitted to the City Arborist, if accompanied by a proposed landscape plan. The landscape plan must show the number, size, and species of plants and must replace all removed trees at a 1:1 ratio. 
5.  Tree Planting Standards. All trees proposed shall adhere to Section 4.6.15 relating to standards for tree planting. 
6.  Exemptions. The City and public utility companies shall be exempted from acquiring individual job permits to perform necessary tree maintenance on public rights-of-way or public lands. 
D.  Public Utility Standards for Maintenance of Trees. All work performed by public utilities involving maintenance of trees on public rights-of-way shall adhere to the standards listed below. 
1.  Nature of Work. The work shall be limited to the actual necessities required to maintain safe and reliable systems. 
2.  Necessary Maintenance. Necessary maintenance shall be deemed the maintenance necessary to prevent regrowth into the wire zone during the established cycle length. 
3.  Maintenance Standards. All maintenance shall adhere to American National Standards Institute Standard 300, as amended. 
4.  Waiver. During the event of a natural disaster, such as an ice storm, tornado or hurricane, the public utility standards for maintenance of trees shall be waived. 
5.  Coordination. The public utilities shall communicate and coordinate with the City Arborist when clearing or pruning within the rights-of-way. 
E.  Licensure of Tree Experts. 
1.  Application. To protect the public, the City shall require anyone who removes or maintains trees as a business on public or private lands to be licensed. 
2.  Examinations by City Arborist. In order to be licensed, individuals shall be examined by the City Arborist to determine the ability to conduct such work before granting a license to practice as a tree expert. 
3.  Other Examinations. Passage of the examination administered by the International Society for Arboriculture (ISA) for Certified Arborist or Certified Tree Worker may be accepted in lieu of an examination by the City Arborist. 
4.  City Workers. Employees of the City responsible for maintaining public trees shall be examined in the field for their ability to properly prune, maintain, or remove trees but shall not be required to pay the application fee. 
5.  Application. A $25.00 fee shall be made payable to Columbus, Georgia to accompany the application for examination for each applicant. 
F.  House Moving Permits. To avoid damage to public trees, any building or other large objects which is to be moved along any street must obtain the following: 
1.  Written permission from the City Arborist; and 
2.  A permit from the Inspections and Code Enforcement Division. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 2, 1-14-14) 
Section 4.7.5. - Land Clearing, Timber Harvesting, and Speculative Grading. 
A.  Exemption. 
1.  Bona Fide Agricultural Purposes. Land clearing for bona fide agricultural purposes within an RE10 or RE5 zoning district, including legitimate timber harvesting, plant or tree nurseries and orchards, is exempt from the provisions of this Article and Article 6 of this Chapter. 
2.  Excluded Tree Harvesting. The exemption provided in this Section shall not be interpreted to include tree harvesting incidental to the development of land, or tree harvesting on land that is anticipated to be developed for nonhorticultural uses. 
B.  Natural Area Required. 
1.  Timber Harvesting. All legitimate timber harvesting on tracts of five or more acres shall be required to provide and maintain a 50 foot wide undisturbed natural area adjacent to all paved public road frontages during harvesting and site preparation activities. 
(A)  Crossings Permitted. A maximum of two access crossings will be allowed. 
(B)  Maintenance. The natural area is to be maintained for five (5) years. 
2.  Other Land Disturbing Activities. For all other land disturbing activities in anticipation of development other than those specified in this Section, a natural areas with an average width of at least 30 feet shall be maintained adjacent to all paved public road frontages. 
(A)  Calculation of Average Width. The average shall be calculated on the plans submitted and include for credit in said calculation only the first 60 feet of the site closest to the right-of-way. 
(B)  Retention of Natural Area. The natural area shall be maintained until a tree protection or planting plan is approved for the site adjacent to all paved public road frontages. The plan may be in narrative form, and shall provide for planting as required by either the perimeter planting requirements of Article 6 of this Chapter or the requirements of Article 5 of this Chapter relating to buffering screening and landscaping, whichever is applicable, or seek a variance from such requirements. 
Section 4.7.6. - Cooperation with Other Departments. 
There shall be close cooperation between the City Arborist, the Public Services Department, the Planning Department, the Department of Inspections and Codes, the Engineering Department, the Parks and Recreation Department and all other city departments when their work affects public trees. The City Arborist shall review and comment on the proposed landscaping plans of all recreational lands and other public properties within the City and any plan or project of any department of this city which requires the removal of any tree. 
(Ord. No. 09-40, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 4.7.7. - Nonliability of City. 
Nothing in this Article or Article 6 of this Chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon his private property or under his control in a safe condition. 
ARTICLE 8. - AIRPORTS 

Section 4.8.1. - Airports. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate and restrict growth, development and building height in the area adjacent to the Columbus Metropolitan Airport, including the following: 
1.  Regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth and otherwise regulate the use of property in the vicinity of the Columbus Metropolitan Airport; 
2.  Regulate and restrict the use of property in the vicinity of the Columbus Metropolitan Airport to prevent development of high density residential dwellings or the concentration of large numbers of persons in those areas subject to low flying aircraft in the process of normal operations; and 
3.  Protect flying aircraft by limiting the height of structures and trees. 
Section 4.8.2. - Definitions. 
Definitions relating to the Columbus Metropolitan Airport are provided in Chapter 13. 
Section 4.8.3. - Runway Protection Zone/Airspace Drawing. 
The Runway Protection Zone/Airspace Drawing, Columbus Metropolitan Airport, prepared by the LPA Group Incorporated, Aviation Consultants, dated March 1994, is adopted by reference as part of these land development regulations. 
Section 4.8.4. - Airport Zones. 
A.  Established. In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, airport zones are established which include all the land within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they apply to the City of Columbus. Individual airport zones are indicated below. 
1.  Approach Zones. The inner edge of these zones coincides with the width of the primary surfaces, and the horizontal dimensions are the same as those shown on the airspace zoning map for the respective approach surfaces. 
2.  Transitional Zones. These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(A)  Relation to Horizontal and Conical Surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and extend at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
(B)  Relation to Conical Surfaces and Centerline. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
3.  Horizontal Zones. The horizontal zones are hereby established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radius from the center of each end of the primary surface of Runway 5-23 and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include approach and transitional zones. This zone is the imaginary surface 150 feet above the highest point of the airport elevation. 
4.  Conical Zones. The conical zones are hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zones do not include the precision instrument approach zones or the transitional zones. 
B.  Location of Zones. The airport zones are shown on the Runway Protection Zone/Airspace Drawing, Columbus Metropolitan Airport, consisting of one sheet, prepared by the LPA Group Incorporated, Aviation Consultants, dated March 1994. 
C.  Effect of Airport Zones. 
1.  Additional Zoning Requirements. These airport zones shall be superimposed over existing zone districts and the special requirements of these airport zoning regulations shall apply in addition to the requirements of the use district within which a specific property is located. 
2.  Multiple Zones. An area located in more than one of the following airport zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
Section 4.8.5. - Airport Zone Height Limitation. 
A.  Height Limits. Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by these regulations to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for each zone. 
B.  Elevation. Such height limitations are hereby established for each zone in question as the elevation of the respective imaginary surfaces shown on the airspace zoning map. 
C.  Most Restrictive. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
Section 4.8.6. - Use Restrictions. 
A.  Interference Prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these land development regulations, one or more uses shall not be made of land or water within any zone established by these regulations in such a manner as to: 
1.  Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft; 
2.  Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others; 
3.  Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; 
4.  Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or 
5.  Otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the first 2,500—foot segment of the approach zone beginning at the end of the primary surface for Runway 6-24 and the first 1,700-foot segment of the approach zone beginning at the end of the primary surface for Runway 13-31: 
1.  Houses of worship, schools, lodges, clubs, theatres, and other places of public assembly; 
2.  Multifamily dwellings in excess of four units per structure or in a group development; 
3.  Hospitals and institutions; and 
4.  Any other similar use where a concentration of people is customary. 
C.  Airports. The following uses are permitted subject to conformity with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) safety standards applicable to the particular airport property: 
1.  Grassed or paved runways, taxiways, landing strips and aprons; 
2.  Aircraft fueling facilities; 
3.  Aircraft storage, service and repair hangars; 
4.  Passenger and freight terminal facilities, including any accessory use as contracted and approved by the Airport Commission; 
5.  Lighting, radio and radar facilities; 
6.  Accessory structures and facilities including aircraft, aviation and accessory sales. 
Section 4.8.7. - Height Standards. 
All buildings shall comply with Federal Aviation Agency height standards. Heights in excess of 30 feet may be permitted only upon securing a use permit from the Airport Commission. 
Section 4.8.8. - Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Regulations not Retroactive. These airport regulations shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to these regulations as of the effective date of this chapter or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. 
B.  Marking and Lighting. 
1.  Installation Required. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Columbus Metropolitan Airport Commission to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such hazards. 
2.  Expense of Marking and Lighting. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Columbus Metropolitan Airport. 
C.  Termination of Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Discontinuance. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of one year shall result in loss of the nonconforming use status. In addition, the change of use to a more restrictive or to a conforming use for any period of time shall be considered evidence of intent of abandonment, and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived. 
2.  Partial Destruction. Any nonconforming use, building or structure that, as a result of fire, explosion, or other casualty, has 50 percent or more of its replacement value destroyed, shall thereafter be terminated, and any new construction shall be in accordance with these regulations. 
3.  Expansion. Any existing nonconforming use as described in these regulations shall not be expanded by altering, replanting or otherwise enlarging it so as to increase in any way its hazard within the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff or to increase the potential hazard to persons assembled within a structure so located and used. 
Section 4.8.9. - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in accordance with the regulations of this Article may apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from such regulations. 
Section 4.8.10. - Permits. 
A.  Material Changes. A material change shall not be made in the use of land, and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. 
B.  Application. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient information to determine whether the resulting use or structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
C.  Existing Use. A permit shall not be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of these regulations or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
D.  Hazard Marking and Lighting. 
1.  Any permit granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of these regulations and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the Columbus Metropolitan Airport Commission, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. 
2.  Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Columbus Metropolitan Airport. 
E.  Approval Agencies. Applicants for a building permit or for variances to these regulations shall submit written approval from the City Engineer and the FAA, and other approval as required by the Chief of the Inspections and Code Enforcement Division regarding height and safety before issuance of a permit. 
ARTICLE 9. - SHORT-TERM RENTALS 

Section 4.9.1. - Intent; purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of individuals and the community at large; to monitor and provide reasonable means for citizens to mitigate impacts created by occupancy of short-term units; and to implement rationally based, reasonably tailored regulations to protect the integrity of the city's neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.2. - Definitions; general provisions. 
Code compliance verification form is a document executed by a short-term unit owner certifying that the short-term unit complies with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. No person shall allow occupancy or possession of any short-term rental unit if the premises is in violation of any applicable zoning, building, health or life safety code provisions. 
Short-term rental unit means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit, either the primary structure or any approved accessory dwelling is provided for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Such use may or may not include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all single family and multi-family housing types and shall exclude group living or other lodging uses, as described in Chapter 3 and defined in Chapter 13, respectively, of the Unified Development Ordinance of the Columbus Consolidated Government. A short-term rental unit may not include a motor vehicle as defined in Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Short-term rental owner means the owner of record of the property. If the owner is not a natural person, the duties of the owner shall be carried out by the officer of the corporation or entity whose responsibility is to control the use of the premises. 
Short-term rental permit is the permit issued by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code to owners of short-term rental units who have submitted the required documentation and met the requirements set for in this Article for the operation of a short-term rental unit. 
Short-term rental occupants means guests, tourists, lessees, vacationers or any other person who, in exchange for compensation, occupy a dwelling unit for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. 
Short-term rental agent means a natural person designated by the owner of a short-term rental on the short-term rental permit application. Such person shall be available for and responsive to contact at all times and someone who is customarily present at a location within the city for purposes of transacting business. An owner who is a natural person may also be the short-term rental agent. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.3. - Short-term rental permit. 
No person shall rent, lease or otherwise exchange for compensation all or any portion of a dwelling unit as short-term rental, as defined in Section 4.9.2, without first obtaining a short-term rental permit pursuant to the regulations contained in this Article and then obtaining a business license from the Revenue Division of the Department of Finance. No permit issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.4. - Application for short-term rental permit. 
A.  Owners desiring to obtain a short-term rental permit shall submit, on an annual basis, an application for a short-term rental permit to the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. The application shall be furnished under oath on a form specified by the city manager, accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $40.00 or as may be revised in the city's annual budget ordinance or such other ordinance as may later be passed by Council. Both the short-term rental unit owner and short-term rental agent will consent to a criminal background check which will be reviewed by the department before the application is accepted for processing. If any required background check reveals felonies within the last ten years or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the last five years, the application will not be accepted for processing. Such application should include: 
1.  The name, address, telephone and email address of the owner(s} of record of the dwelling unit for which a permit is sought. If such owner is not a natural person, the application shall identify all partners, officers and/or directors of any such entity, including personal contact information; 
2.  The address of the unit to be used as a short-term rental; 
3.  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent, which shall constitute his or her 24-hour contact information; 
4.  The owner's sworn acknowledgement that he or she has received a copy of this section, has reviewed it and understands its requirements; 
5.  The number and location of parking spaces allotted to the premises; 
6.  The owner's agreement to use his or her best efforts to assure that use of the premises by short- term rental occupants will not disrupt the neighborhood, and will not interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties; and 
7.  Any other information that this chapter requires the owner to provide to the city as part of an application for a short-term rental permit. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to obtain additional information from the owner as necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter. 
B.  Attached to and concurrent with submission of the application described in this section, the owner shall provide: 
1.  The owner's sworn code compliance verification form; 
2.  A written exemplar agreement, which shall consist of the form of document to be executed between the owner and occupant(s} and which shall contain the following provisions: 
(A)  The occupant(s)' agreement to abide by all of the requirements of this chapter, any other Columbus Consolidated Government ordinances, state and federal law and acknowledgement that his or her rights under the agreement may not be transferred or assigned to anyone else; 
(B)  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement that it shall be unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set forth in the City's noise ordinance; 
(C)  The owner and occupant(s)'acknowledgement that the unit is not being leased for and will not be advertised, promoted, or have any amenities provided for the purposes of providing any adult entertainment as defined in Article VI of Chapter 14 of the Columbus Code or providing Escort Services as defined in Article VII of Chapter 14 [of] the Columbus Code; and 
(D)  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement and agreement that violation of the agreement or this chapter may result in immediate termination of the agreement and eviction from the short-term rental unit by the owner or agent, as well as the potential liability for payments of fines levied by the city. 
3.  Proof of the owner's current ownership of the short-term rental unit; 
4.  Proof of insurance satisfactory in accordance with administrative guidelines published by the Columbus Consolidated Government; and 
5.  A written certification from the short-term agent that he or she agrees to perform the duties specified in Subsection 4.9.5.8. 
C.  Permit holder shall publish a short-term rental permit number in every print, digital, or internet advertisement and any property listing in which the short-term rental is advertised. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.5. - Short-term rental agent. 
A.  The owner of a short-term rental shall designate a short-term rental agent on its application for a short-term rental permit. A property owner may serve as the short-term rental agent. Alternatively, the owner may designate a natural person as his or her agent who is over age 18 and is customarily present at a location within the city for purposes of transacting business. 
B.  The duties of the short-term rental agent are to: 
1.  Be reasonably available to handle any problems arising from use of the short-term rental unit; 
2.  Keep his or her name and emergency contact phone number posted in a readily visible place in the short-term rental unit; 
3.  Receive and accept service of any notice of violation related to the use or occupancy of the premises; and; 
4.  Monitor the short-term rental unit for compliance with this chapter. 
C.  In the event the short-term rental agent is replaced by another agent, the owner will apply for a new short-term rental permit with the correct short-term rental agent designated within 30 days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.6. - Grant or denial of application. 
Review of an application shall be conducted within two days and shall be granted unless the applicant fails to meet the conditions and requirements of this chapter, or otherwise fails to demonstrate the ability to comply with local, state or federal law. Any false statements or information provided in the application are grounds for revocation, suspension and/or imposition of penalties, including denial of future applications. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.7. - Short-term rental units. 
A.  A legible copy of the short-term rental unit permit shall be posted within the unit and include all of the following information: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent: 
2.  The short-term rental unit permit number; 
3.  The maximum occupancy of the unit; 
4.  The maximum number of vehicles that may be parked at the unit; and 
B.  Short-term rental units must be properly maintained and regularly inspected by the owner to ensure continued compliance with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. 
C.  The short-term rental unit current business license shall be posted within the unit. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.8. - Short-term regulation procedure. 
A.  To ensure the continued application of the intent and purpose of this chapter, the Columbus Georgia Convention and Visitor's Bureau ("the CCVB") shall maintain and make available to appropriate Consolidated Government officials a list of all short-term rental units as defined by this Article, and the CCVB will also notify the owner of any short-term rental unit it identifies of the requirements of this Article and the permit application process. 
B.  The Department of Inspections and Code shall maintain for each short-term rental location file a record of all code violation charges, founded accusations and convictions occurring at or relating to a short-term rental unit. When a property owner has accumulated three code violations for a particular property within a period of 12 consecutive months, the Department of Inspections and Code shall revoke any pending permits and reject all applications for the subject premises for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
C.  If a short-term rental unit owner has been cited and found to be in violation of any zoning, building, health or life safety code or other violations, the owner must demonstrate compliance with the applicable code prior to being eligible to receive a short-term rental permit. 
D.  Citations for code violations and any other violation of the city code shall be heard by the recorder's court of Muscogee County. Violations of this chapter, including but not limited to operating a short-term rental unit without obtaining a short term rental permit and a business license are subject to the following fines, which may not be waived or reduced and which may be combined with any other legal remedy available to the City: 
(1)  First violation: $500.00. 
(2)  Second violation within the preceding 12 months: $750.00. 
(3)  Third violation within the preceding 12 months: $1,000.00. 
E.  A person aggrieved by the city's decision to revoke, suspend or deny a short-term rental permit may appeal the decision to the city manager or his appointed designee. The appeal must be filed with the city manager's office in writing, within 30 calendar days after the adverse action and it shall contain a concise statement of the reasons for the appeal. Timely filing of an appeal shall stay the revocation, suspension or denial pending a decision by the city manager. 
F.  The city manager or appointed designee shall consider the appeal within 30 days after receipt by the city manager of a request unless otherwise agreed in writing by the city and aggrieved party. All interested parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses. The city manager shall render a determination, which will constitute a final ruling on the application. 
G.  Nothing in this section shall limit the city from enforcement of its code, state or federal law by any other legal remedy available to the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or supplant the power of any city inspector, police officer, or other duly empowered officer under the city's ordinances, rules and regulations and the authority granted under state law, as amended, to take necessary action, consistent with the law, to protect the public from property which constitutes a public nuisance or to abate a nuisance by any other lawful means of proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Section 4.9.9. - Taxes. 
Short-term rental unit owners are subject to state sales tax, city taxes, including but not limited to the hotel/motel tax, and are liable for payment thereof as established by state law and the city code. The city may seek to enforce payment of all applicable taxes to the extent provided by law, including injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 18-45, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Chapter 5 - Environmental Protection 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 5 

[Sec. 5.1.1. - Purpose of Chapter 5.] 
This Article sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment within Columbus, including the treatment of rivers and streams, water supply watersheds, groundwater resources and wetlands, in accordance with State requirements. 
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSES OF WATER RESOURCES PROTECTION 

[Sec. 5.2.1. - Purposes of Water Resources Protection.] 
This Chapter proscribes restrictions on the use of land near certain rivers and streams, within water supply watersheds, within groundwater recharge areas susceptible to pollution, and in wetlands in order to: 
A.  Protect the drinking water quality of the rivers, streams, reservoirs and aquifers that supply water to the residents of the jurisdiction and the State; 
B.  Protect the natural habitat of animal and plant life relative to water resources; and 
C.  Protect valuable water-related natural resources for recreation, to help control erosion and sedimentation of soil into Columbus' rivers and streams, for contribution to drought management, and to help absorb floodwaters. 
ARTICLE 3. - RIVER AND STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION 

Section 5.3.1. - Identification of Protected Rivers and Streams. 
The following rivers and streams are declared to be protected rivers and streams and are regulated under the provisions of this Article: 
A.  The Chattahoochee River; and 
B.  All other perennial streams or watercourses, other than the Chattahoochee River. 
Section 5.3.2. - Restrictions Affecting Protected Rivers and Streams. 
A.  Stream Buffers Along Protected State Rivers. A natural vegetative stream buffer is established as follows: 
1.  Land Included. The stream buffer shall include all lands within 100 feet of the Chattahoochee River, inclusive of any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbank. The area between the top of the banks and the edge of the river shall be included within the River Corridor Protection Plan. 
2.  Restrictions on Use of Land. Land may not be used, and vegetation shall not be disturbed, within the stream buffer by building construction, development activity, septic tanks or septic tank drain fields, the handling of hazardous wastes, or for any other purpose except for the permitted uses listed below. 
(A)  A land use existing prior to the adoption of the River Protection Plan. 
(B)  A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
(1)  The dwelling is located on a lot having an area of at least two acres, not including any area that lies between the riverbanks; 
(2)  Only one dwelling is located on the lot; and 
(3)  A septic tank drain field shall not be located within the stream buffer. 
(C)  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; and 
(2)  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act. 
(D)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8 of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the O.C.G.A. 
(E)  Public road and utility crossings complying with all requirements of the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(F)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative stream buffer or with river-dependent recreation, such as a boat ramp. 
(G)  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
(2)  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act; and 
(3)  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, including all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(H)  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities, and public water and sanitary sewerage mains. 
(I)  Utilities, other than public water or sewerage facilities, provided that: 
(1)  Utilities that cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area, as determined by Columbus; 
(2)  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the stream buffer to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible; and 
(3)  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(J)  Mining activities, if permitted by DNR pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(K)  Other uses permitted by the zoning district and by DNR under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
B.  Other Protected Streams. 
1.  Streams in Water Supply Watersheds. All protected streams located within a water supply watershed must comply with the natural stream buffer and setback requirements established for streams and reservoirs in the watershed. See Section 5.4.2. for buffer requirements. 
2.  All Other Streams. 
(A)  Other Streams in General. For perennial streams for which there are no stream buffer or setback restrictions otherwise established by this Section, there is established a buffer along the banks of any state waters in the widths indicated under Section 5.3.2. B.2(A)(1), below, except where the EPD Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the EPD Director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to this Section shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the EPD Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(1)  Except where a stream buffer of greater width is required by this Section, or as provided in Section 5.3.2B.2(B) for trout streams, below, there is established a buffer along the banks of any state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of 50 feet for all new development projects. For all other lands that are already developed, the undisturbed area must be at least 25 feet. 
(2)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a stream buffer and a stream buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a stream buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(3)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications are implemented: 
(a)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(b)  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(4)  The buffer shall not apply to any ephemeral stream. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director. 
(B)  Trout Streams. 
(1)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, as long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The EPD Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(2)  The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a stream buffer and a stream buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream, cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implement: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
C.  Notation of Restrictions. Restrictions shall be noted on the plats and deeds of included properties to maintain any designated natural stream buffer area, undisturbed area or construction setback required by these regulations. Stream buffers are to be included in natural resource or conservation easements for new development projects in accordance with the provisions for such easements in the Ownership of Open Space Article of the Resource Conservation Chapter of this UDO. 

Figure 5.3.1 Stream Corridor 
Table 5.3.1 Stream Buffers and Setbacks  Summary of River Corridor, Stream Corridor and Water Supply Watershed Requirements 

 
D.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 7-13-10) 
ARTICLE 4. - WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Section 5.4.1. - Water Supply Watersheds with Reservoir. 
The Chattahoochee watershed is recognized as a large water supply watershed, having 100 square miles or more of drainage area above the Lake Oliver water supply intake. The watershed qualifies further for environmental protection because the drainage area supplies water to the Lake Oliver water supply reservoir. A second reservoir, Upatoi Creek is located wholly within the Ft. Benning Reservation. 
Section 5.4.2. - Chattahoochee River Watershed. 
All water flow of the county is directed to the Chattahoochee River, either directly or indirectly through intermediate drainage basins. 
A.  Protected Watershed. 
1.  Establishment of Protected Watershed Areas. The protected watershed area includes all or any portion of the following drainage basins and areas within the corporate boundaries of Columbus: 
(A)  The Lake Oliver water supply reservoir; 
(B)  All lands within 150 feet of any water supply reservoir boundary; and 
(C)  All lands within the Chattahoochee watershed located within a 7-mile radius of the boundary of any water supply reservoir. 

2.  Restrictions within a Protected Watershed Area. Within the protected watershed area, the restrictions listed below shall apply. 
(A)  Natural Stream Buffer Around Water Supply Reservoir. A natural stream buffer shall be established and maintained within 150 feet of the banks of the reservoir boundaries. Vegetation, land disturbance and land uses shall be controlled by the provisions of the Lake Oliver Reservoir Management Plan, and the Upatoi Creek Water Management Plan as approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(B)  Hazardous Materials. Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 313 of the Emergency Planning Right-To-Know Act, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
B.  Protected Stream Corridors. 
1.  Definition of Protected Stream Corridors. Within the protected watershed area, all lands within 150 feet of the banks on both sides of any perennial stream or river, located within a 7-mile radius of the boundary of the Lake Oliver and Upatoi Creek reservoirs, shall be established as protected stream corridors and conform to the provisions of this Section. 
2.  Restrictions within Protected Stream Corridors. Along a protected stream corridor the restrictions listed below shall apply. 
(A)  A natural stream buffer shall be established and maintained within 100 feet of both sides of the banks of any perennial stream within the protected stream corridor. 
(B)  No clearing, earth moving, construction or ground disturbance is allowed within the 100-foot wide natural stream buffer. Exceptions include bike and footpaths constructed of permeable material, gravity sanitary sewers, and road crossings perpendicular to streams. The installation of storm sewers will also be allowed. The area that is within this restricted construction area is to be left natural or developed as a trail with a minimum of disturbance to the natural habitat. 
(C)  No impervious surfaces shall be constructed within the 150-foot wide protected stream corridor. 
(D)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the protected stream corridor. 
C.  Appeals to Council. Appeals to council shall conform to Section 10.11.6.1 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 08-66, § 1, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 5-25-10) 
ARTICLE 5. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE PROTECTION AREA 

Section 5.5.1. - Definition of Protected Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
Groundwater recharge areas are defined as "significant recharge areas" by the State of Georgia and are protected relative to their susceptibility to pollution. 
A.  Significant Recharge Areas. Significant recharge areas are defined by DNR using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
B.  Pollution Susceptibility Category. Categories of relative vulnerability of an aquifer to pollution, classified as higher, average or lower, are defined by the DNR using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 20, along with the most significant recharge areas. 
C.  Incorporation of Recharge Area Maps. The Hydrologic Atlas 18 and the Hydrologic Atlas 20 are hereby adopted and incorporated into this Article as though set forth herein. 
Section 5.5.2. - Protected Groundwater Recharge Area Restrictions. 
A.  Land Use Restrictions. Within any significant recharge area, as defined and delineated by the DNR, the land use restrictions listed below shall apply. 
1.  Hazardous Waste Treatment Facilities. New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(A)  Impermeable Surfaces. Any facility that involves the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall perform such operations on an impermeable surface having a spill and leak collection system. 
(B)  Impermeable Surfaces. Any facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976h, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
2.  Sanitary Landfills. New sanitary landfills, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
3.  Above-ground Chemical and Petroleum Tanks. A new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tank must have secondary containment of 110% of the volume of the tank or 110% of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. This requirement does not apply to: 
(A)  Any tank having a maximum capacity of less than 660 gallons; and 
(B)  Any tank used for agricultural purposes, provided it complies with all Federal requirements. 
B.  Lot Size Restrictions. Several significant groundwater recharge areas in the City have been mapped by the State on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18, primarily in the southern part of Columbus. The significant groundwater recharge areas in the southern half of the city are classified as having "average" susceptibility to pollution and the northern half as having "lower" susceptibility to pollution. 
1.  Lower Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "lower" susceptibility to pollution, the following restrictions shall apply. 
(A)  Agricultural Waste Impoundment Sites. New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 50 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of 1 foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
(B)  Septic Tanks. A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must be located on a lot or parcel of land that is at least 110% of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(C)  Manufactured Home Park. A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must be located on a lot or parcel that is at least 110% of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
2.  Average Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "average" susceptibility to pollution, the following restrictions shall apply. 
(A)  Agricultural Waste Impoundment Sites. New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 15 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of 1 foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
(B)  Septic Tanks. A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 125% of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(C)  Manufactured Home Park. A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 125% of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
ARTICLE 6. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Section 5.6.1. - Definition of Protected Wetlands. 
A.  Wetlands. "Wetlands" are areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
B.  Identification. Protected wetlands are those wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or otherwise approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based on competent studies prepared by a registered and qualified professional engineer. 
C.  New Wetland Areas. Any new wetland area constructed as a best management practice for stormwater control is also considered a protected wetland once construction is complete. 
Section 5.6.2. - Wetlands Map Adopted. 
The National Wetlands Inventory Map (NWI Map) prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service covering the City is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the official map of protected wetlands in the city. 
A.  Limit of NWI Map. The NWI Map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
B.  Affect of Local Actions. Any local government action under these regulations does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Section 5.6.3. - Restrictions on Use of Protected Wetlands. 
Within any protected wetlands area, the following restrictions shall apply. 
A.  Alteration or Degradation. Alteration or degradation of a protected wetland requires prior approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
B.  Hazardous or Toxic Wastes. Hazardous or toxic waste at receiving, treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
C.  Sanitary Landfills. Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
D.  Land Uses Permitted. Land uses that may be allowed if permitted by the zoning district and by the Section 404 permit include: 
1.  Timber production and harvesting; wildlife and fisheries management. 
2.  Camping, hiking, hunting and fishing recreation activities. 
3.  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities; and 
4.  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Section 5.6.4. - Plans for Land Disturbance Permits. 
Design professionals shall indicate wetlands on appropriate plan sheets required for a land disturbance permit application. The design professional that prepared the required plans accompanying the permit application shall add a statement to the appropriate plan sheets indicating whether or not wetlands are located on the property by checking the appropriate box. At a minimum, the statement shall be placed on the Grading Plan; the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan; and the Stormwater Management Site Plan. 
Figure 5.6.1  Wetlands Certification 

 
(Ord. No. 08-66, § 1, 11-25-08) 
Section 5.6.5. - Requirement for Local Permit. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within protected wetlands without written permission or a permit from the City. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands boundary, as determined using the National Wetlands Inventory Map and certification of the design professional, no land disturbance permit affecting the wetland or the 50-foot wide area around the wetland will be issued by the City until a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is issued from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Chapter 6 - RESOURCE CONSERVATION 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER 6 

Section 6.1.1. - Purpose. 
This Article sets out requirements for the protection or conservation of valuable historic and natural resources, and for the development of resource conservation subdivisions. 
Section 6.1.2. - Applicability. 
As used in this Chapter, the term "subdivision" does not include those subdivisions classified as "minor subdivisions" under this Ordinance. Such minor subdivisions are exempt from the preliminary plan requirements for project approval under the provisions of the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT 

Section 6.2.1. - Conventional Subdivisions. 
A.  Defined. A conventional subdivision is a subdivision in which all lots meet or exceed the minimum lot size, lot width, and all other dimensional requirements of the property's zoning district. 
B.  Minimum Open Space. At least 100% of all areas classified as Primary Conservation Areas within a site proposed to be developed as a conventional subdivision must be included within a conservation easement, as further provided in this Article. There is no minimum amount of open space that must be set aside in a conventional subdivision. 
Section 6.2.2. - Resource Conservation Subdivision Option. 
A.  Defined. A resource conservation subdivision is a subdivision in which the lot sizes, lot widths, and other dimensional requirements are established by this Chapter, while the number of lots allowed is based on the zoning district of the property and the conservation of valuable resources. A resource conservation subdivision is allowed by right through the same process of approval as a conventional subdivision. 
B.  Permitted Zoning Districts. Only properties zoned RE10, RE5, RE1, RT, SFR1, SFR2, SFR3 and SFR4 may be approved as a resource conservation subdivision. 
C.  Minimum Area for Conservation, Preservation or Recreational Use. At least 100% of all areas classified as Primary Conservation Areas within a site proposed to be developed as a resource conservation subdivision, but no less than 20% of the total site, must be set aside as open space for conservation, preservation or recreational use, as further provided below. If less than 20% of the site is located within Primary Conservation Areas, then areas classified as Secondary Conservation Areas are to be given preference for inclusion in the minimum required open space. 
ARTICLE 3. - DESIGNATION OF CONSERVATION AND OTHER AREAS 

Section 6.3.1. - Primary Conservation Areas. 
Primary Conservation Areas are areas that are required to be preserved as open space in any major subdivision or private street subdivision. Primary Conservation Areas include the areas identified below. 
A.  River and Stream Channels. These areas are defined as the area between the top of bank and the opposite top of bank of any river, stream or other body of water classified as "state waters." 
B.  Required River and Stream Buffers. Undisturbed stream buffers extending along the banks of the Chattahoochee River, the Lake Oliver Reservoir, and all perennial streams and other state waters that are required by this Ordinance (except for activities that are exempt from the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of the Land Development Activities Chapter of this Ordinance). Stream buffer widths are established under the Environmental Protection Chapter of this Ordinance. 
C.  Registered Historic or Archeological Assets. Sites or areas registered with the State or the National Register of Historic Places qualify under this category since preservation is desirable although not mandated by law. Information regarding all such sites is available from the Georgia Office of Historic Preservation. 
D.  Wildlife Habitats of Threatened or Endangered Species. The following have been identified by the Federal or the State governments as threatened or endangered species in Muscogee County: 
Table 6.3.1  Threatened or Endangered Species Identified in Muscogee County 

 
E.  Cemeteries. Any cemetery or place of burial recognized by the Muscogee County Tax Commissioner as tax exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41, and any "family plot" or other burial ground discovered on the site, must be protected under the requirements of state law pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1, et seq. For the purposes of this Section, State law currently defines "burial ground" and "cemetery" as follows: 
1.  "Burial ground" means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The term shall include privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
2.  "Cemetery" or "cemeteries" means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
F.  Wetlands. Wetlands are illustrated generally on the Wetlands Inventory Maps published by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and are delineated by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. 
G.  Buffer areas Around Wetlands and Habitats of Endangered Species. Additional lands in their natural state provided around designated wetlands and critical wildlife habitats as protective buffers are recognized as Primary Conservation Areas. A wetland buffer must extend at least 50 feet from the wetland, and a buffer around a wildlife habitat must be at least 100 feet deep. 
H.  Flood Hazard Areas. All areas within the 100-year floodplain but lying outside any floodway, wetland or other designated Primary Conservation Area fall under this category. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain are designated as the "flood hazard area" on maps prepared by FEMA, and must be confirmed as to their specific location on the Preliminary Plat. 
Section 6.3.2. - Secondary Conservation Areas. 
Secondary Conservation Areas are areas that are encouraged but not required to be preserved as open space in any major subdivision or private street subdivision. Secondary Conservation Areas include the areas listed below. 
A.  Areas Greater Than 5,000 Square Feet of Steep Slopes. Slopes greater than 25% are to be identified from the topographic data required for the Preliminary Plat. Areas comprising 5,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
B.  Areas Greater Than 40,000 Square Feet with Slopes of 15% To 25%. Slopes between 15% and 25% are to be identified from the topographic data required for the Preliminary Plat. Areas comprising 40,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
C.  Soils with Exposed Bedrock or Rock Outcroppings. Areas with exposed bedrock or rock outcroppings must be identified through observation on each site. Areas comprising 40,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
D.  Mature Timber Stands or Significant Trees. Forests and timberlands that have developed mature stands of trees qualify for conservation consideration. Individual trees that are specimen trees or otherwise have significance through their size, age, species or historic value may be designated as a Secondary Conservation Area to the extent of the tree's dripline. 
E.  Viewshed Protection Areas. These areas are set aside either to screen the view of the subdivision development from abutting roadways or to protect existing scenic views into the subdivision site of rural heritage features. If intended to screen the subdivision development, the viewshed buffer must be adequately vegetated with trees and understory growth to provide an adequate screening effect. If intended to preserve a scenic view, the viewshed protection area must provide an adequate width or orientation in order to preserve the view. Examples of rural heritage features include the following: 

 
F.  Village Greens, Parkways. These areas create neighborhood assets by providing open space and passive recreation close to the homes in a subdivision. A village green is an open space area surrounded by streets and/or building lots on at least three sides, and intended for common neighborhood use. A parkway is a narrow strip of open space surrounded by streets on all sides, intended as a landscaped element or passive recreation area for the neighborhood. 
G.  Passive Recreational Areas. Common areas solely designated and improved for passive recreational activities, such as picnicking, walking, relaxation and repose, may be treated as Secondary Conservation Areas. Active recreation areas, including but not limited to golf courses, swimming pools, sports fields and courts, and community buildings and grounds are not considered conservation uses or conservation areas. 
Section 6.3.3. - Other Areas. 
Other Areas comprise the remainder of a subdivision site, outside of any Primary or Secondary Conservation Area. These include: 
A.  Major Easements. These easements confer some restrictions on their use by the property owner and are not appropriate to be included within the buildable portion of a lot. These types of easements include electric power transmission lines of 69 Kilovolts (Kv) or greater, liquid or natural gas transmission pipelines, and private roads or access drives that traverse the site. 
B.  Minor Easements. These are easements that do not interfere with the normal property rights of an owner in a way that would make their exclusion from a lot desirable. These types of easements often contain stormwater drainage ways or pipes, cross-easements for shared driveways, and temporary easements for road construction. 
C.  Unconstrained Land. The balance of the subdivision site, exclusive of all designated conservation areas and easements, comprise the "unconstrained land" portion of a site and present no particular difficulties for the development of the site. 
ARTICLE 4. - RESOURCE CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 
As an option to conventional subdividing of the land, the developer may elect to create a resource conservation subdivision under the provisions of this Article. 

Section 6.4.1. - Purposes of Resource Conservation Subdivisions. 
The purposes of these provisions, among others, are as follows: 
A.  To recognize the current development rights of property owners established through zoning; 
B.  To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains, and wetlands, by setting them aside from development; 
C.  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development; 
D.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing vegetation and the minimization of development on steep slopes; 
E.  To enhance water quality of streams and waterways, and to protect valuable groundwater resources; 
F.  To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; 
G.  To provide multiple options for landowners in order to minimize impacts on environmental resources (such as wetlands, floodplain, and steep slopes) and disturbance of natural or cultural features (such as mature woodlands, critical wildlife habitats, historic buildings, and archeological sites). 
H.  To conserve scenic views and elements of the county's rural character, and to minimize perceived density, by minimizing views of new development from existing roads; and 
I.  To provide for the conservation and maintenance of open land within Muscogee County to achieve the above-mentioned goals and for enhanced passive recreational use by residents. 
Section 6.4.2. - Resource Conservation Subdivision Process. 
In order to achieve the open space requirement while attaining the development capacity of a subdivision site, all of the steps listed below must be accomplished. 
A.  Identify Conservation Areas. Conservation areas must be identified and mapped. The designations of the various areas considered Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas include references to sources of information to help determine their location. 
B.  Determine Conventional Development Capacity. The development capacity of the site must be determined in order to preserve current property rights. This process involves the determination of the number of lots that could be created through conventional means under the site's zoning category. 
C.  Establish Resource Conservation Development Capacity. To the conventional development capacity of a site are added "bonus" lots in return for the preservation of additional valuable open space beyond the minimum required. 
D.  Design the Subdivision. In order to balance the conservation of valuable resources with current development rights, flexibility is given in minimum lot size and other dimensional requirements. Under no circumstances, however, may a property be developed with more lots than the site's conventional capacity plus "bonus" lots for additional conservation. 
Section 6.4.3. - Development Capacity. 
This Section presents the methodology through which the maximum number of lots that can be developed in a specific resource conservation subdivision is determined. This methodology recognizes current land development capacities established under existing zoning of the site and calculates the practical ability of the site to support development considering the constraints, or lack of constraints, presented by the land itself. An alternate approach is allowed, which requires a convention subdivision layout for the property to determine the maximum "base" lots. 
A.  Usable Land Factors. Many sites contain areas that present practical difficulties in their development, such as the presence of wetlands and streams, poor soil conditions, steep slopes, and State or Federally protected habitats of threatened or endangered species. Development of these types of areas is already restricted or controlled under various laws and regulations. Other areas present legal constraints to development, such as existing easements and rights-of-way. 
1.  Usable Land Factors. The usable land factors shown on Table 6.4.1 are established to determine the extent to which portions of a site are usable for subdivision development. Unusable land has a factor of "0%" since development would be restricted entirely under existing laws relating to flood hazard protection, soil erosion and sedimentation control, cemeteries, watershed protection, and endangered species. At the other end of the spectrum, lands that present no practical or regulatory development restrictions have a factor of "100%" reflecting their status as fully usable. 
2.  Other Land Areas. Other types of areas present some, but not total, practical difficulty and have factors assigned that reflect their normal ability to be utilized in a development. For instance, to a very modest extent, some portions of wetlands, power easements and large rock outcroppings can be included within the minimum lot area of a buildable lot and are therefore considered partially "usable" to a small extent. Flood plains and steep slopes also present difficulties that can be overcome to some extent, and portions of these areas are also often included within the minimum lot area of buildable lots but away from the actual house site. However, the remaining portions of these areas are normally included in areas of a subdivision's lots outside of the minimum lot requirements; thus these remaining portions do not add to the usability of the site for additional lots and are therefore considered only partially "unusable." 
Table 6.4.1  Usable Land Factors 

 
B.  Usable Land Calculation. The amount of usable land that is available for development on a site is determined by multiplying the number of acres in each of the land area types by the Usable Land Factor. For calculation purposes, where land area types overlap, the most restrictive category—the one having the lowest Usable Land Factor applies. The calculation can be accomplished using the worksheet in Table 6.4.2. 
Table 6.4.2  Worksheet to Determine Usable Acres 

 
C.  Number of Lots Allowed. The number of lots allowed to be developed in a resource conservation subdivision is based on the maximum number of buildable lots that could be practically created under the site's zoning classification, plus any bonus lots allowed under these provisions. 
1.  "Base" Lots. Calculation of base lots shall comply with the following standards. 
(A)  Establishment of Base Lots. The number of buildable lots meeting minimum lot requirements that could be practically created under the site's zoning classification establishes the "base" number of lots for the site, and is determined by multiplying the total Usable Acres of the site times the Maximum Density for the applicable zoning classification of the property. The Maximum Density factors are shown on Table 6.4.3 in units per acre for each zoning district. The calculation of each Maximum Density factor takes into consideration an amount for the abutting street that will serve the lot, and an amount for inefficiencies in design and platting that occur because of site shape and lot location. 
Table 6.4.3  Maximum Density Factors by Zoning District 

 
(B)  Base Lots. The "base" number of lots (that is, the maximum number of buildable lots that could be practically created on the site, if developed under conventional means) is determined by multiplying the total Usable Acres of the site times the Maximum Density for the applicable zoning classification of the property. (See the worksheet on Table 6.4.4) The maximum number of "base" lots may not exceed the whole number part of the calculation; partial lots are not allowed; for instance, a calculated 21.8 would allow 21 whole lots. 
(C)  Alternate Approach to Determining "Base" Lots. The conventional development capacity under the site's zoning classification establishes the "base" number of lots for the site. As an alternate to the methodology presented in Subparagraphs (A) and (B), above, the number of lots may be determined from a conventional subdivision design for the property. Such design must meet all requirements for a conventional subdivision under these development regulations for the property's zoning classification. Such conventional subdivision design shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of a preliminary plat as provided in the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance. 
2.  "Bonus" Lots. Additional lots are allowed in the subdivision for the preservation of valuable open space over and above the minimum amount required to be set aside. The minimum portion of the site that must be set aside as open space coincides with the areas that contain all Primary Conservation Areas, but no less than 20% of the total site. To the extent that Secondary Conservation Areas are set aside as open space over and above the minimum 20% requirement for the site, lots will be added to the "base" number of lots for an increased total number of allowed lots. 
(A)  Number of Bonus Lots. The number of bonus lots is directly related to the additional acreage in Secondary Conservation Areas that is set aside as open space. For every 1% of the total site area set aside as open space beyond the minimum required, the number of "base" lots may be increased by 1%. The bonus calculation is subject to the criteria listed below. 
(1)  The land area for bonus lot consideration must fall under one or more of the Secondary Conservation Area classifications as defined above. 
(2)  The acreage in Secondary Conservation Areas must be first applied to the minimum 20% open space requirement if the land set aside under Primary Conservation Areas does not total 20%. This rule applies even though the balance of the designated 20% area is not comprised of Secondary Conservation Areas in its entirety. 
(3)  The number of bonus lots may not exceed the whole number part of the calculation; partial lots are not allowed; for instance, a calculated 21.8 would allow 21 whole lots. 
3.  Total Allowable Lots. 
(A)  Total Lots, Calculated. The worksheet shown on Table 6.4.4 can be used to calculate the total number of lots that are allowed in a particular resource conservation subdivision. 
(B)  Maximum Total Number of Lots. The maximum number of lots that can be achieved in a resource conservation subdivision, regardless of the total number calculated on Table 6.4.4, shall not exceed the gross area of the subdivision times the maximum density allowed for the zoning district in which the resource conservation subdivision is located. See Table 2.2.1 in Chapter 2 for maximum densities allowed in the various residential zoning districts. 
Table 6.4.4 Worksheet to Determine Total Allowable Lots 

 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 6.4.4. - Resource Conservation Subdivision Lot Standards. 
The following standards apply to the layout and minimum requirements for all lots within a resource conservation subdivision. 
A.  Minimum Lot Area and Width. Notwithstanding any calculated number of "base" or bonus lots, all lots within a resource conservation subdivision must meet or exceed the minimum requirements listed below, depending on the sewage disposal system utilized and the distance or buffering from adjacent property. 
1.  Lots Located Near Adjacent Land. Any lot in a resource conservation subdivision that is located within 100 feet of the periphery of the development shall have the same or greater lot size and lot width as the minimum required by the zoning of the property adjacent to the conservation subdivision closest to said lot. For the purposes of this requirement, the term "adjacent to" shall also mean "across the street from." 
2.  Lots Located Away From or Buffered From Adjacent Land. The following shall control the minimum lot size and width of lots in a resource conservation subdivision that are located 100 feet or more from the periphery of the development. 
(A)  Lots Served by Sanitary Sewer. Lots in a resource conservation subdivision that are connected to public sanitary sewer shall meet or exceed the following minimum lot sizes and widths, depending on the distance or buffering from the periphery of the development, as follows: 
(1)  For lots located 100 feet or more from the periphery of the development, the minimum lot size shall be 80% of the Usable Area of the subdivision (Table 6.4.2) divided by the total number of Allowable Lots (Table 6.4.4). 
(2)  For lots located between 100 feet and 350 feet from the periphery of the development, the minimum lot width shall be 70% of the minimum required by the zoning of the conservation subdivision or 100 feet, whichever is less. By way of example, in the RE1 district (which has a minimum lot width of 125 feet) the lots in a resource conservation subdivision could be 87.5 feet wide, while in the RE5 district (which requires a minimum lot width of 200 feet) the lots in a resource conservation subdivision could be 100 feet wide (70% of 200 = 140 feet; 100 feet is less). 
(3)  The minimum lot width shall be 60% of the minimum required by the zoning of the conservation subdivision or 100 feet, whichever is less, under either of the following situations: 
(a)  The lot is located between 100 feet and 350 feet from the periphery of the development and is buffered from the adjacent property by an opaque screen, or 
(b)  The lot is located more than 350 feet from the periphery of the development. 
(B)  Septic Tank and Community Sewage Disposal System Lots. 
(1)  For lots served by individual on-site septic tank systems, the minimum lot size shall be the minimum size established by the Muscogee County Health Department. These minimum lot sizes may be adjusted in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Protection Chapter of this Ordinance, to protect significant groundwater recharge areas. 
(2)  For lots served by a community sewage disposal system, minimum lot sizes shall be as approved by the Muscogee County Health Department under rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(3)  In no case shall the minimum lot size and minimum lot width of septic tank or community sewage disposal system lots in a conservation subdivision be less than the sizes and widths allowed for similarly located sewered lots. 
(C)  "Opaque Screen" Defined. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Opaque means impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
(2)  Screening means a method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another. Screening may consist of any combination of the following; existing or planted vegetation comprised of trees and understory shrubs; masonry walls or all-weather (non-wooden) fencing; earthen berms or natural topography. 
Table 6.4.5  Conservation Subdivision Lot Sizes and Widths 

 
B.  Maximum Number of Lots. In no event is the total number of lots in a resource conservation subdivision to exceed the Total Allowable Lots permitted under these regulations, which totals both the practical development capacity of the subdivision under current zoning (the "base" lots) plus the total "bonus" lots. 
C.  Other Minimum Lot Requirements. Other than minimum lot area and lot width requirements, all minimum requirements of the zoning district of the subdivision site apply to each of the subdivision lots, including but not limited to the minimum heated square footage per dwelling unit, minimum yard requirements, and maximum height of buildings, in addition to all other applicable laws and regulations. 
Section 6.4.5. - Street Design Standards. 
Innovative and creative design standards for construction of the subdivision street system, including stormwater management considerations, traffic calming techniques, on-street parking provisions and roadway dimensional requirements (other than cross-sectional construction standards for base, binder and topping) may be approved by the Engineering Department for incorporation into the Project Approval of the preliminary subdivision plat. 
A.  The streets shall meet AASHTO standards for a 25 mph design. 
B.  The street system shall incorporate traffic calming techniques, such as horizontal curves, roundabouts, mid-street traffic circles or other generally recognized techniques as approved by the Engineering Department. 
Section 6.4.6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2007, deleted § 6.4.6, which pertained to expiration and renewal and derived from the original codification of this UDO adopted on December 14, 2004. 
ARTICLE 5. - ALLOWED USES OF OPEN SPACE 

[Section 6.5.1.0. - Allowed Uses of Open Space.] 
The following requirements apply to land set aside for conservation in fulfillment of the provisions of this Chapter and additional areas set aside as open space, whether under a conservation easement in a conventional subdivision or as open space in a resource conservation subdivision. 
Section 6.5.1. - Undisturbed Areas. 
Certain areas identified as Primary or Secondary Conservation Areas shall remain in their natural, undisturbed state. Such undisturbed areas include floodways; stream buffers; viewshed buffers; critical wildlife habitats and buffers; wetlands and wetland buffers; and mature timber stands except for managed forestry activities, including harvesting. 
Section 6.5.2. - Allowed Uses in Other Areas. 
The following uses are allowed in open space land areas to the extent that they are compatible with the protection and preservation of areas required by law but not otherwise required to remain undisturbed, and are allowed uses under the site's zoning classification. 
A.  Conservation. Conservation of open land in its natural state, such as woodland, open field, or managed meadow. 
B.  Agricultural Use. Agricultural and horticultural uses, including raising crops, pasturelands and dairy operations, along with associated buildings including residences that are specifically needed to support an active, viable agricultural or horticultural operation. Specifically excluded are commercial livestock operations involving swine, poultry, mink, and other animals likely to produce highly offensive odors. 
C.  Pasture. Pastureland for horses used solely for recreational purposes. Equestrian facility buildings and grounds shall be permitted but may not be located in any Primary Conservation Area. 
D.  Silviculture. Silviculture, in keeping with established standards for selective harvesting and sustained yield forestry, and best management practices endorsed by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
E.  Neighborhood Open Spaces. Neighborhood open space uses such as village greens, commons, picnic areas, community gardens, trails, and similar low-impact passive recreational uses specifically excluding motorized off-road vehicles, rifle ranges, golf courses, sports fields and courts, community recreation buildings and grounds, swimming pools, and other active recreation uses. 
F.  Pathways. Pathways and trails, and passive recreation activities such as fishing, picnicking, and nature interpretation. 
G.  Water Supply. Water supply and sewage disposal system reserve fields and stormwater detention areas designed, landscaped, and available for use as an integral part of the open space. The septic tank and drain field required for on-site sewage disposal must be located on the lot of the house it serves. Areas within the open space used for water supply, reserve fields or stormwater detention must be located outside of any Primary or Secondary Conservation Area, and must be established by easements between the appropriate parties and recognized in the conservation easement covering the open space. 
H.  Easements. Easements for drainage, access, sewer or water lines, or other public purposes. 
I.  Above-ground Utility Rights-of-way. Above-ground utility and street rights-of-way may traverse conservation areas but shall not count toward the minimum required open space land. 
ARTICLE 6. - OPEN SPACE DESIGN CRITERIA 

Section 6.6.1. - Design Principles. 
The following principles shall guide the layout of open space set aside to meet the minimum open space requirements of this Chapter and to those areas set aside to achieve "bonus" lots in a resource conservation subdivision. These guidelines can, but need not be applied by the developer to additional lands set aside as open space that exceed the requirements of this Chapter. 
A.  Areas Included. Open space areas must include all Primary Conservation Areas and those Secondary Conservation Areas set aside to qualify for "bonus" lots. Illustrated below are acceptable and unacceptable approaches to protection of important conservation resources. 
B.  Fragmentation. Fragmentation of open space land must be minimized so that these resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. To the greatest extent practical, the open space land should be designated as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long, thin strips of conservation land should be avoided unless necessary to connect other significant areas or when they are designed to protect linear resources such as streams, steep slopes or trails. 
C.  Design. Open space areas should be designed as part of larger continuous and integrated open space systems. Whenever possible, they should connect with existing or potential open space areas on adjoining parcels. 

Preservation Area 
Section 6.6.2. - Design Requirements. 
The following are minimum requirements that apply to the layout of open space set aside to meet the minimum open space requirements of this Chapter and to those areas set aside to achieve "bonus" lots in a resource conservation subdivision. 
A.  Minimum Width. The minimum width of any open space area shall be 100 feet, as measured perpendicular to the centerline between the boundaries of the open space, except as noted below. 
1.  Natural Boundaries. Any portion of a Primary or Secondary Conservation Area that, by the very nature of its designated boundaries, is less than 100 feet in width. Examples include strips of steep slopes and "fingers" of floodplains that extend up drainage swales. 
2.  Parkways. Parkways between road travelways designated as Secondary Conservation Areas, which must be at least 26 feet in width. 
3.  Viewsheds. Viewshed buffers, if provided to screen the view of the subdivision development, must be at least 200 feet in width unless the topography of the land adequately screens the view of the buildings in the subdivision from the abutting roadway. 
B.  Minimum Size. The minimum size of any open space area shall be two acres of contiguous land, except as provided below. 
1.  Primary or Secondary Conservation Areas. A portion of a Primary or Secondary Conservation Area that adjoins the site and extends into the site covering an area of less than two acres. 
2.  Isolated Steep Slope. An isolated strip of steep slope, provided that such an area having a slope greater than 25% must comprise at least 5,000 square feet, and such an area having between 15% and 25% must comprise an area of at least 40,000 square feet. 
3.  Buffer Areas. Buffer areas around wetlands or habitats of endangered or threatened species, provided that the combination of the buffer area and the wetland or wildlife habitat must contain at least two acres of contiguous area. 
4.  Historic and Archeological Assets. Historic or archeological assets and specimen trees that can be adequately protected by an area of less than two acres. 
5.  Parkways. Parkways between road travelways that are limited in size due to intersecting roads. 
C.  Path and Street Crossings. Where path systems cross an internal subdivision street, the access points must be directly across from each other and clearly identified both to the motorist and pedestrian by signage and crosswalk striping. Where a path crosses any public road, the path must be grade separated (i.e., by a tunnel or bridge), or located at a traffic control device such as a regulated intersection or flashing light approved by the City. 
ARTICLE 7. - OWNERSHIP OF OPEN SPACE 

Section 6.7.1. - Conservation or Natural Resource Easements; Required. 
A.  Primary Conservation Areas. All primary conservation areas in a conventional subdivision or a resource conservation subdivision that are required to be protected by the provisions of this UDO, shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use as follows: 
1.  By a natural resource easement in a conventional subdivision; or 
2.  By a conservation easement in a resource conservation subdivision. 
B.  Secondary Conservation Areas. Lands in secondary conservation areas that are designated by the developer for protection shall be included within a natural resource easement in a conventional subdivision or a conservation easement in a resource conservation subdivision. 
Section 6.7.2. - Natural Resource Easements. 
A.  Natural Resource Easements; Creation. The natural resource easement, when required, shall be shown on the final subdivision plat and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court at the same time as the final plat. 
1.  When included within the lots in a subdivision, the natural resource easement shall be granted at no cost to an entity that meets the provisions for a Homeowners Association in Section 6.7.4. 
2.  When the land to be included in the easement is owned by the homeowners association, the easement shall be created and granted as a conservation easement under the provisions of Section 6.7.3. 
3.  The natural resource easement shall grant a third-party right of enforcement to the Columbus Consolidated Government to enforce, at its discretion, any of the terms of the natural resources easement. 
B.  Guidelines for Natural Resource Easements. The following guidelines must be incorporated into any natural resource easement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney: 
1.  The easement specifically and clearly must identify the boundaries of the property subject to the easement through reference to the easement area shown on the final subdivision plat; 
2.  The easement must contain restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifically delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations shall be consistent with the type of area protected and the requirements of this Article applicable to such areas, and may include but shall not be confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dumping, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and uses made of the property; 
3.  The easement must provide for the right of the holder of the easement to inspect the property to assure observance of restrictions and also provides for enforcement procedures; 
4.  The easement must contain provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered or terminated except with the express written permission of the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
Section 6.7.3. - Conservation Easements. 
A.  Conservation Easement Required. All primary conservation areas and all open space areas in a resource conservation subdivision shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use, by a conservation easement. The conservation easement shall be approved by the City, and either: 
1.  Co-signed by the City and donated to a private nonprofit conservation organization or land trust; 
2.  Co-signed by the City and donated to a non-profit homeowners association; or 
3.  Donated to the Columbus Consolidated Government if accepted by the City. 
B.  Conservation Easements; Creation. The conservation easement shall be created subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1, et seq., which is known as the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act." 
1.  The conservation easement shall be approved by the City Council and shall be granted at no cost to a charitable corporation, charitable association or charitable trust that qualifies as a "holder" under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act. 
2.  The conservation easement shall grant a third-party right of enforcement to the Columbus Consolidated Government to enforce, at its discretion, any of the terms of the conservation easement. 
3.  The conservation easement may not be granted to the owner of the property to which the easement will apply, including a homeowners association holding natural resource conservation areas as common open space in a resource conservation subdivision. 
C.  Guidelines for Conservation Easements. The guidelines listed below are required to be incorporated into any conservation easement. 
1.  Special Qualities. The easement must recognize and describe in a statement of purpose the special qualities of the property subject to the easement. Conditions within the tract subject to the conservation easement may be shown by map and/or photograph. 
2.  Ownership. The easement must clearly identify the owner of the property subject to the easement, the holder of the easement and co-signer, and the responsibilities of the property owner, easement holder and co-signer. 
3.  Boundaries. The easement specifically and clearly must identify the boundaries of the property subject to the easement, either by metes and bounds legal description or survey plat. 
4.  Restrictions. The easement must contain restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifically delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations may include but are not confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dumping, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and certain uses made of the property. 
5.  Rights of Inspection. The easement must provide for the right of the easement holder and co-signer to inspect the property to assure observance of restrictions. It also provides for enforcement procedures. 
6.  Maintenance. The easement provides for the maintenance of the open space. 
7.  Amendments. The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder, property owner, and any cosigners. 
Section 6.7.4. - Open Space Ownership. 
In addition to a conservation easement, the open space areas in a resource conservation subdivision shall be permanently protected through ownership either by a nonprofit homeowners association, a private nonprofit conservation organization or land trust, or by the Columbus Consolidated Government, if accepted by the City. Protection shall be provided as indicated below. 
A.  Homeowners Association. Open space may be owned and managed in common by a nonprofit homeowners association, subject to the requirements listed below. 
1.  Approval of Association. The developer of the subdivision shall obtain approval from the City, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, of a description of the homeowners association, including bylaws and methods for maintaining open space. 
2.  Establishment of Association. The homeowners association shall be established by the subdivision developer and endowed with a financial subsidy from the developer prior to the approval of a final plat on the property. The amount of the financial subsidy shall be no less than that required by the plan for maintenance of open space and operation of common facilities approved for the subdivision or development as provided in the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance. The amount of the financial subsidy shall include an amount no less than the estimated taxes, operation and maintenance costs for the open space to be incurred for a period of no fewer than 3 years from the time at which control of the association will be turned over to the purchasers of the subdivision lots or homes. 
3.  Membership. Membership of each nonopen space lot owner in the subdivision shall be mandatory and automatic. 
4.  Responsibilities of Association. The homeowners association shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space within the subdivision. The association shall be required to assess dues for the maintenance of open space, purchase of insurance, and payment of taxes, unless another income source is proven to be available. Members of the association shall share equitably the costs of open space development and maintenance as indicated in bylaws. The association shall be empowered with the legal ability to place liens on non-open space lot owners for failure to pay association dues. 
5.  Dissolution of Association. The homeowners association shall not be dissolved without the consent of the City Council. If common ownership of the open space by a homeowners association is proposed and approved, then the open space shall be subject to permanent deed and final plat restrictions or covenants on the future use, development, and subdivision of the open space, in addition to the requirement of a conservation easement. 
6.  Maintenance Funds. The City may require that the homeowners association establish a minimum amount of funds to be initially deposited and maintained in a maintenance account. 
B.  Private Nonprofit Conservation Organization or Land Trust. With the City's approval, the open space may be transferred, in whole or in part, to a private nonprofit conservation organization or land trust, subject to the criteria listed below. 
1.  Nature of Organization. The organization is a bona fide conservation organization intended to exist indefinitely. 
2.  Reversion or Transfer of Responsibilities. The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter or transfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions. 
3.  Financial Ability. The organization demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that the organization is financially capable of executing its responsibilities, including stewardship and maintenance of the open space. 
4.  Subsidy. The developer provides to the organization a financial subsidy for the maintenance and operation costs of the open space and any associated facilities prior to the approval of a final plat on the property. The financial subsidy shall include an amount no less than the estimated taxes, operation and maintenance costs for the open space to be incurred for a period of no fewer than 3 years from the time at which ownership of the open space will be turned over to the organization. 
C.  Fee Simple Dedication to the City. Dedication in fee simple ownership to the public for recreational and/or open space use, is a possible mechanism for the permanent retention and maintenance of some or all of the open space within the subdivision, at the sole discretion of the City Council, and subject to the criteria listed below. 
1.  Basis of Approval of Dedication. Dedication to the City shall only be approved if the City Council finds that the size, shape, location, type of open space, or cost of development or maintenance of such open space or the availability of open space would make public ownership desirable or necessary. 
2.  Decision by Council. The decision to accept open space for fee simple public ownership shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council. 
3.  When Required. The City generally will require dedication of all open space or park and recreation areas indicated for acquisition in the County's Comprehensive Plan or capital improvement program. 
4.  Maintenance Bond. The Council may require a maintenance bond or other financial security with a duration of 12 months following public acceptance in an amount sufficient to ensure that such lands do not cause unwarranted public expenditures because of faulty conditions or construction. The City shall have authority to cash said bond in the event substandard conditions or construction are evident. Otherwise, following the one-year period following public dedication, with satisfactory performance, the City shall return the performance bond to the subdivider. 
5.  Deed Required. In addition to the required conservation easement, a deed for open space lands in a form acceptable to the City Attorney in favor of the Columbus Consolidated Government shall be signed and recorded prior to or along with recordation of any final plat pertaining to land within the subdivision. 
D.  Multiple Ownership. In some cases, different parties, depending on the actual use of the open space and the resources that are being protected, may own different portions of the open space. For instance, the portion of the open space that may provide important assets to the life of the neighborhood—village greens, passive recreation areas, horse riding pasturage or open vistas, may be most appropriately owned and maintained by a homeowners association, while critically important features requiring non-use preservation, such as a forested floodplain or the habitat of endangered wildlife, may be best donated to a conservation organization. 
Section 6.7.5. - Maintenance. 
A.  Responsibility. The cost and responsibility for maintenance of the open space and any facilities located in the open space shall be the responsibility of the property owner, unless that responsibility is specifically transferred as part of the conservation easement. 
B.  Maintenance Plan. The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plat submission, provide a plan for maintenance of open space and operation of common facilities in accordance with the requirements listed below. 
1.  The plan shall define ownership. 
2.  The plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic operation and maintenance responsibilities for the various kinds of open space. 
3.  The plan shall establish staffing responsibility, insurance requirements, and associated costs and define the means for funding the maintenance of the open space and operation of any common facilities on an ongoing basis. Such funding plan shall include the means for funding long-term capital improvements as well as regular yearly operating and maintenance costs. 
4.  Any changes to the maintenance plan shall be first approved by the City. 
C.  Failure to Maintain. In the event that the organization established to maintain the open space and the common facilities, or any successor organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion thereof in reasonable order and condition, the City may assume responsibility for maintenance, in which case any escrow funds shall be paid to the Columbus Consolidated Government and any prior existing maintenance agreements shall be revoked or suspended. The City thereupon may enter the premises and take corrective action, including extended maintenance. The costs of such corrective or continuing action may be charged to the owner of the open space or common facilities and/or to the individual property owners of the subdivision at the sole discretion of the City. Such costs may include administrative costs and penalties. Costs may be recovered as indicated below. 
1.  Property Assessments. The City may apportion the costs among the property owners in the subdivision as an assessment, payable over one or more years. Such assessment shall become a lien on said properties until satisfied. Notice of such lien shall be filed by the City in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
2.  Special Taxes. The City may establish a special tax district encompassing the subdivision and levy an ad valorem property tax annually in an amount adequate to fund maintenance and operations of the open space. 
Chapter 7 - PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 7 

[Section 7.1.1. - Purpose of chapter.] 
This Chapter sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
ARTICLE 2. - STANDARDS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE 

Section 7.2.1. - Standard Design Specifications. 
Standard design specifications of the City of Columbus, as such are adopted by the Council and as may be amended from time to time, are incorporated into this Ordinance as though set forth within the body of this Ordinance. In the case of a conflict between the Standard Design Specifications and the text of this Ordinance, the text of this Ordinance shall control. 
Section 7.2.2. - Traffic Signs and Street Striping. 
The installation of all traffic control signs and street striping shall be governed by the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
Section 7.2.3. - Georgia DOT Standard Specifications. 
Unless otherwise specially set forth in this Ordinance or the Standard Design Specifications of the City of Columbus, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT). 
Section 7.2.4. - AASHTO Design Standards. 
Design criteria and standards not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the latest edition of the AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
Section 7.2.5. - Stormwater Management. 
The design, construction, operation and maintenance of the stormwater system, including stormwater detention facilities and all conveyances whether piped or open, shall conform to the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, published August 2001 and as may be amended from time to time. 
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 7.3.1. - Suitability of the Land. 
Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, topographic, geologic or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
Section 7.3.2. - Comprehensive Plan and Other Adopted Plans Conformance. 
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats and development site plans shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations, and written proof of such compliance must be furnished when requested by the Director of Planning. 
A.  Compliance with Comprehensive Plan. All proposed subdivisions and developments shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the Planning Division. 
B.  Platting of Streets and Other Features. All highways, streets and other features of the Comprehensive Plan shall be platted by the developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or the Columbus-Phenix City Transportation Improvement Program. 
C.  Georgia DOT Approval Required. In subdivisions or developments related to or affecting any State or U.S. numbered highway, the approval of the Georgia DOT shall be required in accordance with State law (see the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance). 
D.  Dedication or Reservation of Public Lands. When features of other plans adopted by the City Council, such as schools or other public-building sites, parks or other land for public uses, are located in whole or in part in a subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
E.  Refusal of Land Proposed to be Dedicated. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the City Council finds not required or suitable for such public use, the City Council shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the land developer of the reasons for such action. 
F.  Adopted Codes. The subdivision or plat shall comply with applicable land development regulations, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
1.  Dimensional Requirements. A conventional subdivision must meet all lot dimensional requirements of the applicable zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  Resource Conservation Subdivision. A resource conservation subdivision must meet all lot dimensional requirements as established by these development regulations under the Resource Conservation Chapter, depending on the zoning district in which it is located. 
G.  Official Zoning Map. All subdivision plats and development site plans shall comply with the Official Zoning Map of Columbus. 
H.  Health Department and State Agencies. All subdivision plats and development site plans shall comply with all rules of the Muscogee County Health Department and appropriate state agencies. 
Section 7.3.3. - Name of Subdivision or Development Project. 
The name of each subdivision or development project must have the approval of the Planning Division. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development project in Columbus. 
Section 7.3.4. - Street Layout. 
A.  Minimum Separation Interval. 
1.  Subdivision streets that intersect a State or U.S. numbered highway shall do so at intervals of not less than 800 feet, or as required by the DOT, whichever is greater. 
2.  Intersections with arterial streets shall be at least 800 feet apart measured from centerline to centerline. 
3.  The distance between all other street intersections, measured centerline to centerline, shall be no less than 250 feet on collector streets and 125 feet on local streets. 
B.  Through Traffic. Streets shall be laid out within a development so as to discourage through traffic and excessive speed on local streets. However, the provision for the extension and continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining areas is required. 
C.  Street Layout Designs. Street layout designs shall conform to Section 6.4.5 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 7.3.5. - Lots. 
A.  Minimum Lot Dimensions and Areas. All lots proposed in a subdivision shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
B.  Authority of Health Department. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing the Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this Development Ordinance are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
C.  Adequate Building Sites. Each lot shown on a preliminary or final subdivision plat shall contain a building site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. Neither lot remnants nor lots that will require variances shall be platted. 
D.  Arrangement of Side Lot Lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines (including cul-de-sacs). 
E.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 
F.  Minimum Setback Along Highways. 
1.  Arterial Roads. For any lot that adjoins an arterial road, the minimum building setback along such road shall be 100 feet from the right-of-way line; provided that the setback may be reduced by the Engineering Department to a distance equal to the building setback required on the lot by the zoning district plus the amount of right-of-way that will be required in the future. Future right-of-way requirements shall be determined by the classification of the road and future improvement plans based on a 20-year build-out study of traffic demand. 
2.  Minimum Frontage. All lots shall front on a minimum of 25 feet of dedicated public right-or-way or upon a right-of-way that has received the legal status of such, except as provided for within specific zoning districts in Section 7.4.2. 
G.  Areas Reserved for Future Development. If any portion of a tract is reserved for future subdivision development, the minimum lot width and frontage of the reserved area may be reduced to the width required for a future street to serve such area. 
1.  Identification. Such a reserved area must be labeled "Reserved for Future Development" on the final subdivision plat, and the portion of the lot where a street will be built must be labeled "Future Street." 
2.  Requirements for Building Permits. Such a reserved area will not be eligible for issuance of a building permit unless the lot meets all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including minimum lot width and frontage requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
H.  Plats Straddling Political Boundaries. Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the Director of Inspections and Codes may request assurance from the City Attorney or the other county to ensure that access is legally established, and that the access road is adequately improved. In general, lot lines shall be laid out so as to not cross-jurisdictional boundary lines. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09) 
ARTICLE 4. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 7.4.1. - Required Improvements; Major Subdivisions. 
The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every major subdivision, as defined in the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance, and in every individual multi-family or nonresidential development in accordance with the standards contained in this Article. 
A.  Monumentation. Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in such a subdivision. 
B.  Street Access. Streets providing access to such a development and to all lots in such a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
1.  Improvements. Streets contained wholly within such a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Chapter. Existing streets that adjoin such a development shall be improved to the full standard of this ordinance. 
2.  Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter where required along all roadways. 
3.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks as required by this Chapter. 
C.  Drainage. Stormwater drainage and detention facilities. 
D.  Street Names and Traffic Control. Street name signs, stop bars, striping and traffic control signs as approved by the City shall be provided at the developer's expense. 
E.  Driveway Access. Driveways and development entrances shall be provided in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter at the time of initial development or, for individual lots, at the time of building construction. 
F.  Water Supply. 
1.  Public Water Supply Required. Public water service shall be provided to every lot in such a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection if public water is available within 1,500 feet of the subdivision or development. 
(A)  Connection of Water Mains. Water mains shall be connected to the existing public water system and extended past each lot. 
(B)  Compliance. All water system improvements shall meet the Columbus Waterworks standards for public water service. 
(C)  Installation. A contractor approved by the Columbus Waterworks shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves, service laterals through the curb line, and fire hydrants at the developer's expense. 
(D)  Minimum Water Flow. Water flow shall supply a minimum of 550 gallons per minute at hydrants. 
2.  New Construction. New construction of a principal building on any lot that is within 100 feet of an existing public water line shall be required to connect to the public water line. 
3.  Unavailability of Public Service. If a public water system is not available nor under bid or contract to be available, the subdivider shall provide a water supply using a community water system or individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the Muscogee County Health Department, these development regulations and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  Community Water System. If a community water system is created, it must be designed to provide a minimum fire flow of 550 gallons per minute, meet City of Columbus standards, and a special tax district and a homeowners association shall be established for the subdivision at the time of final plat recording. The homeowners association shall: 
(A)  Require mandatory and automatic membership of each lot owner; 
(B)  Provide for the collection of adequate payments for all expenses of the system; and 
(C)  Provide that the association cannot be dissolved without the approval of the Council. 
G.  Sanitary Waste Disposal. 
1.  Connection Required. Every lot in such a subdivision and every development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage system if sanitary sewerage is available as determined by the Columbus Waterworks. 
(A)  Connection. Sewer lines shall be connected to the City of Columbus' sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot in accordance with all Columbus Waterworks requirements. 
(B)  Installation. Every element of the sanitary sewerage system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the Columbus Waterworks. 
2.  New Construction. New construction of a principal building on any lot that is within 100 feet of an existing public sanitary sewerage line shall be required to connect to the public sanitary sewerage line. 
3.  Unavailability of Public System. If a public sewerage system is not available nor under bid or contract to be available, each lot shall be provided with septic tanks or other on-site disposal systems in accordance with the regulations of the Muscogee County Health Department, these development regulations and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  Community Septic System. If a community septic system is created, a special tax district and a homeowners association shall be established for the subdivision at the time of final plat recording. The homeowners association shall: 
(A)  Require mandatory and automatic membership of each lot owner; 
(B)  Provide for the collection of adequate payments for all expenses of the system; and 
(C)  Provide that the association cannot be dissolved without the approval of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 12-53, § 3, 12-4-12) 
Section 7.4.2. - Required Improvements; Private Streets. 
A.  Applicability. Private streets, reserve strips, or access easements are prohibited except in multi-family and nonresidential developments, or as otherwise approved by the City Council on a case-by-case basis. 
B.  Compliance. Private streets shall comply with all requirements and standards that apply to public streets for the type of development that they serve. Streets serving apartment and condominium developments and associated storm drainage shall be constructed to the residential public street standards of this Ordinance. Driveways and parking lot aisles shall not be considered as "streets." 
C.  Owner's Release. At the time of purchasing property that is served by a private street that is constructed using standards that are the same as those required for public streets, upon any sale or resale of a property, the purchaser shall acknowledge by execution of a release that the street is private and not maintained by the City, and that maintenance of the street is the responsibility of the owner or other private association or entity identified in the release. The release is to be prepared using a form acceptable to the Attorney to the Columbus Consolidated Government and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
D.  Other Standards. A private street subdivision shall meet all other requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions, such as storm water runoff and detention requirements, the provision of utilities, and traffic and street name signs. 
1.  Identification of Private Streets. Private streets shall be denoted as such on the street name signs for each such street. 
(A)  Names of Proposed Streets. Proposed streets, which are extensions of, or in alignment with, existing or other proposed streets shall have the same name. 
(B)  Duplication of Street Names. Street names shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. 
(C)  Signs. Street name signs shall be blue in color and labeled as private along with the street name, in accordance with City requirements. 
2.  Gates. Any gate placed across a private street that limits access to a subdivision or development shall provide for unimpeded access by emergency vehicles, governmental vehicles on official business, and delivery services including the U.S. Postal Service. Accessibility to such gated communities shall comply with all standards and requirements of the City for access activation, and shall be of breakaway construction. 
Section 7.4.3. - Required Improvements; Minor Subdivisions. 
By definition, a minor subdivision does not involve the construction of major public improvements, such as new streets or stormwater detention. However, the following improvements are required in order to adequately serve the lots and protect the safe operation of the existing road: 
A.  Right-of-way Dedication. Right-of-way shall be dedicated along the property's frontage from the centerline of the existing road equal to one-half of the minimum requirement for the classification of the road, as established in this Chapter. 
B.  Preservation of Stormwater Capacity. The stormwater carrying capacity of the road, whether in an existing ditch or gutter, shall not be compromised. If the stormwater characteristics of the existing road are inadequate to accommodate the new lots, the Director of Engineering may require improvement of the roadway ditch as appropriate. 
C.  Monumentation. All lot corners shall be marked with an iron pipe or one-half inch iron pin at least 24 inches long and driven flush or no more than one inch above the finished grade. 
ARTICLE 5. - GUARANTEE AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 7.5.1. - Guarantee of Work. 
A.  Minimum Guarantee. The subdivider shall guarantee all work performed by him or his agent against failure for a period of two years after completion of work. 
1.  Bond Required. To ensure compliance with the above, a bond in the amount of five percent of the estimated costs of the work shall be posed. Security for said bond shall be endorsed by a banking, lending or mortgaging institution. 
2.  Intent of Bond. This, however, is not to be construed as an alternative to acceptance of any doubtful or substandard work, nor is it intended to include failure due to utilities installed after the developer has completed his work. 
Section 7.5.2. - Inspection During Construction. 
A.  Inspections. All construction performed under the auspices of these regulations shall be subject to inspection by the Department of Engineering. The contractor shall be responsible for notifying this department in writing prior to commencement of any such work. If the contractor fails to make this notification, the contractor shall then be responsible for the expense of any operation or laboratory testing required by the City Engineer to ascertain compliance with specifications. 
Section 7.5.3. - Acceptance of Improvements. 
A.  Rejection of Materials or Work. The City Engineer shall have the authority to reject any material or work that does not meet the requirements of specifications adopted by council. Prior to the filing of a final plat, the subdivider shall be required to certify to the Department of Engineering in writing that all street, drainage and other improvements that are to be dedicated to the City have been completed in accordance with the construction plans previously approved by the Department of Engineering. 
B.  Completion of Improvements. A final subdivision plat shall not be approved by the City or accepted for recordation by the Clerk of the Superior Court until all required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the Engineering Director. 
ARTICLE 6. - SURVEY MONUMENTS 
Exterior subdivision boundaries, lots and street corners shall be established as provided in this Article. 

Section 7.6.1. - Required Monuments. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, all other street or lot corners shall be marked with an iron pipe or one-half inch iron pin at least 24 inches long and driven no less than one inch or up to six inches above the finished grade. 
Section 7.6.2. - Installation. 
All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval. 
ARTICLE 7. - EASEMENTS 

Section 7.7.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
Easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, as provided in this Article. 
Section 7.7.2. - Utility Easements. 
A.  Utility Easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the City or other appropriate public entity for such purpose. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. Easements for water and sanitary sewers shall meet the requirements of the Columbus Waterworks. 
Section 7.7.3. - Drainage Easements. 
This Section applies to public easements for drainage facilities. Private drainage easements providing for stormwater flow between two properties may also be shown on the subdivision plat, but are easements between the two property owners and are not public easements. 
A.  Installation. Drainage easements shall be cleared and opened using best management practices at the time of development to control surface water run-off. Run-off slopes and side slopes shall be specified by the developer's engineer according to good engineering practices. 
B.  Easement Required. 
1.  Location. A publicly dedicated drainage easement is to be provided along any man-made drainage channel or drainage pipe that is part of the stormwater management system approved by the City for the property and is located outside a street right-of-way. 
2.  Minimum Requirements. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width based on pipe diameter, as follows: 
Table 7.7.1  Easement Widths for Drainage Pipe 

 
C.  Identification and Maintenance. Drainage easements located off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. 
D.  Public Recreation Areas. 
1.  Area to be Dedicated. Lakes, ponds, creeks, boat ramps, and similar areas may be accepted for maintenance if and only if sufficient land is dedicated for a public recreation area, access to said area is provided, and the area is approved by the Department of Parks and Recreation. 
2.  Acceptance. If such area constitutes a necessary part of the drainage system as defined in the surface drainage plan, said area may be accepted by the Council only if access is provided and the area is approved by the Department of Engineering. 
3.  Time of Acceptance. All such areas, if they are to be accepted, must be accepted before approval and recordation of the final plat. 
Section 7.7.4. - Overlapping Easements. 
Easements for sanitary sewers and drainage purposes may be combined, but must be a minimum of 30 feet if in combination. 
ARTICLE 8. - STREETS 

Section 7.8.1. - Access. 
A.  Access Provided. A publicly approved street complying with the requirements of this Article shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision, either a publicly dedicated street or an approved private street. 
B.  Access to Public Streets. Every development and every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. 
C.  Future Streets. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
D.  Elimination of Access. A subdivision or development shall not be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
E.  Reserve Strips. Reserve strips shall be prohibited. 
F.  Limitation on Single Entrances. A single entrance road to a subdivision shall serve no more than 99 lots. Where the property configuration prohibits or makes impracticable the installation of more than one entrance, the Director of Engineering may waive this requirement following sound engineering practice. Any property owner aggrieved by a determination made pursuant to the standards set forth in this code section 7.8.1.F may seek a variance to such standard upon request to Council. A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
1.  A finding that the property configuration prohibits or makes impracticable the installation of more than one entrance; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; 
3.  A finding that Council has received and reviewed the recommendations of the Department of Engineering, the Department of Planning, the Department of Public Works, the Columbus Police Department, and the Columbus Fire and EMS Department concerning the variance request; and 
4.  A determination by Council that the granting of a variance will not interfere with the provision of City services along the impacted streets, inhibit the access of public safety vehicles into the affected area, result in, extraordinary public expense, or otherwise threaten the safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 18-39, § 1, 7-31-18) 
Section 7.8.2. - Street Classifications. 
A.  Classification and Definition of Streets. Streets are classified according to the function that they serve. The classification of specific streets is maintained by the City on road inventory listings and maps as appropriate, provided that a "low volume local street" shall be a local street that carries or is expected to carry fewer than 300 vehicle trips per day. 
B.  Relation to Present and Future Street System. The street pattern within a development or subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width in the section of the community involved, unless the Director of Engineering deems such extension undesirable. Topography, natural features such as streams and tree growth shall be considered. 
1.  Minimum Requirements. Every subdivision and every development project shall contain and abut streets that meet at least the minimum requirements of this Ordinance for a local street. Access from a substandard street not having at least the lowest minimum right-of-way width required by the City, the local street standard, shall not be allowed. 
2.  Proposed Subdivisions. For proposed subdivisions, multi-family or nonresidential developments accessing an existing, dedicated or platted street whose right-of-way is inadequate, the developer shall make available to Columbus, at fair market value the additional rights-of-way necessary to meet the minimum right-of way standards beyond that required for a local street. 
3.  Existing Streets. Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. 
(A)  Extension of Street Width. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width for the street's classification. 
(B)  Additional Dedication Required. 
(1)  Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for a local street, and shall reserve for acquisition such right-of-way as needed if the street classification requires greater width than for a local street. 
(2)  If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to local street standards, and reserved for acquisition if the street classification requires greater right-of-way than a local street. 
4.  Provision of Access. Where, in the opinion of the Director of Engineering, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property or existing streets, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property or existing street through the development. 
Section 7.8.3. - Design Standards for Streets. 
A.  Arterial Streets. All State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia DOT. Arterials that are not under the jurisdiction of the Georgia DOT also shall be constructed to DOT standards. 
B.  Local and Collector Streets. All local, collector and marginal access streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this Ordinance, except that all State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia DOT. 
C.  Minimum Width of Right-of-way. Minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall comply with the requirements of Table 7.8.1. 
Table 7.8.1  Minimum Right-of-Way Width 

 
D.  Additional Right-of-way. Right-of-way width greater than shown on Table 7.8.1 may be required in accordance with road improvement projects approved as part of the most recently adopted Columbus-Phenix City Transportation Improvement Program. 
E.  Vertical Alignment of Streets. 
1.  Minimum Grade. All streets shall have a minimum grade of 0.5%. Minimum grade on cul-de-sacs should be 1.0% or otherwise maintain 0.5% in curb line. 
2.  Minimum Design Speeds. Minimum design speeds and maximum grades for proposed streets by street classification shall comply with Table 7.8.2. 
Table 7.8.2  Street Grades and Design Speed 

 
3.  Changes in Grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance. 
4.  Minimum Stopping Sight Distance. The sight distance shall be measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be 3.5 feet in height above the pavement surface, to an object 2 feet high on the pavement. Minimum sight distances shall be maintained in accordance with Table 7.8.3. 
Table 7.8.3  Minimum Vertical Sight Distance 

 
5.  Minimum Sight Distances for Subdivision Intersections. Intersections within subdivisions shall be designed with a grade not to exceed eight percent for a minimum distance of 100 feet. 
F.  Horizontal Alignment of Streets. 
1.  Where a deflection angle of more than 5 degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as provided in Table 7.8.4, or as allowed by AASHTO Design Standards for the design speed of the street. 
Table 7.8.4  Horizontal Alignment 

 
2.  Minimum Curved Street Tangent. On a horizontal curve having a design speed greater than 30 mph, there shall be a minimum 100 foot tangent between curved road sections. Tangents between curved road sections on roads with design speeds of 30 mph or less are encouraged but not required. 
3.  Intersections. All streets shall intersect at no less than 60 degrees, and as near a right angle as possible. 
(A)  Limitation. An intersection shall involve the confluence of at least three but no more than four traffic approaches. 
(B)  Measurement. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. 
(C)  Line of Sight. Such intersecting streets shall provide an uninterrupted line of sight from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum sight distance required in accordance with these development requirements. 
4.  "Eyebrow" intersections. The junction of two approaches along a road, meeting at an "eyebrow" cul-de-sac, shall not be considered an "intersection" if the two approaches are no more than 500 feet long (measured from the nearest intersection), the interior angle formed by the two approaches is no less than 90 degrees, and the number of lots gaining access from the two approaches and the "eyebrow" cul-de-sac is no more than 30. 
5.  Multiple Intersections Prohibited. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than four approaches shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Department of Engineering. 
6.  Intersection Islands. Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the Engineering Director. In no case shall anything extend more than three feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
7.  Curb Lines at Intersections. Curb lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 15 feet between local streets, 25 feet for collector-to-collector intersections, and 30 feet connecting any street to an arterial. 
8.  Intersecting Right-of-way Lines. Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall parallel the back of curb of the roadway, or shall be mitered along both streets from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines and the back-of-curb radius lines. 
9.  Traffic Calming. Traffic calming designs or techniques are encouraged and will be considered for approval by the Engineering Department on a case-by-case basis. 
G.  Sight Visibility Triangle at Street and Driveway Intersections. 
1.  Sight Visibility Triangle Required. A sight visibility triangle shall be located at every street intersection with another street or a private driveway. 
2.  Sight Distance Required. 
(A)  The sight distance for horizontal curves at subdivision entrances and all intersections is determined by the line of sight available assuming the eyes of the driver to be 3.5 feet above grade, and the approaching vehicle to be 4.25 feet high. 
(B)  The sight distance is measured along the existing edge of pavement beginning at the centerline of the proposed entrance and ending where the line of sight intersects it. 
(C)  Examples of obstructions are vegetation, ground cover, signs, existing topography, etc. 
(D)  This paragraph shall not apply where the zoning ordinance requires no building setback line. 
3.  Sight Visibility Triangle Delineated. 
(A)  At public street intersections, the two intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting the right-of-way lines at the points indicated in Figure 7.8.1. 
(B)  At private driveway intersections with public streets, the edge of the driveway's pavement or back of curb will be used for the sight triangle measurements along the driveway. 

Figure 7.8.1 
Table 7.8.5  Minimum Horizontal Sight Distance at Intersections  (See Illustration) 

 
4.  Vegetation and Trees. The planting of trees or other vegetation or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the sight visibility triangle shall be prohibited. 
H.  Dead-end Streets and Culs-de-sac. 
1.  Maximum Length. A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 750 feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the Engineering Department. 
2.  Termination. Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter, and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of 80 feet. 
3.  Minimum Standards. Such a street shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having right-of-way and roadway dimensions as set forth in the Columbus Standard Details. 
4.  Termination of Temporary Dead-end Streets. 
(A)  A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall be allowed where the logical extension of a subdivision street is terminated or future access to adjoining property is required under Section 7.8.2.B.4. A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac also shall be allowed as a temporary stage of construction of a street that is intended to be extended in a later stage of construction within the same development. All such temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turn-around having a roadway radius of 40 feet if: 
(1)  One or more lots front exclusively on or gain their access from the street; and 
(2)  Extension of the street is not under construction when the Final Plat is submitted for recording. 
(B)  If required to have a temporary turn-around, such temporary turn-around shall consist of 6 inches of graded aggregate base. The temporary turn-around shall be paved to the full dimensions and construction standards for a cul-de-sac if the street is not extended prior to the end of the maintenance period and construction plans have not been submitted to the Engineering Department for the extension. 
I.  Alleys and Service Drives. Alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces satisfactory evidence of the need for alleys. Where an alley has been specifically authorized or required by the Planning Department, it shall be a private drive and shall comply with the minimum design standards indicated below. 
1.  Minimum Width and Paving. The roadbed width shall be no less than 20 feet, containing a paved roadway of no less than 16 feet exclusive of gutters. 
2.  Dead-end Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around having a radius of at least 40 feet. 
J.  Half Streets Prohibited. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
K.  Appeal of Street Design Standards. Any property owner aggrieved by a determination made pursuant to the standards set forth in this Code section 7.8.3 may seek a variance to such standard upon request to council. A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; 
3.  A finding that Council has received and reviewed the recommendations of the Department of Engineering, the Department of Planning, the Department of Public Works, the Columbus Police Department, and the Columbus Fire and EMS Department concerning the variance request; and 
4.  A determination by Council that the granting of a variance will not interfere with the provision of City services along the impacted streets, inhibit the access of public safety vehicles into the affected area, result in, extraordinary public expense, or otherwise threaten the safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 18-4, § 1, 1-23-18) 
Section 7.8.4. - Street Improvements. 
Streets shall be constructed and paved with top courses that comply with the following standards. 
A.  Minimum Width of Roadway. 
1.  Minimum Width for Curb and Gutter Streets. The minimum roadway width for curb and gutter streets, measured back to back of curb, shall be as required for the street type on Table 7.8.6. 
Table 7.8.6  Street Base and Pavement 

 
2.  Minimum Width for Streets without Curb and Gutter. For streets without curb and gutter, the minimum roadway width for a collector street is 48 feet measured from edge to edge of the pavement, and for a commercial, industrial or residential local street the minimum is 24 feet. Requirements for the street base, binder and topping are the same as shown on Table 7.8.6. 
B.  Street Base. 
1.  Graded Aggregate Base Course. The base course shall consist of mineral aggregate and may be a combination of natural deposit or a blend of the materials specified. All materials are subject to approval by the Engineering Director. If a blend of materials is used, it shall be blended through a base plant that meets the latest specifications of the Georgia DOT Specification 815. 
2.  Thickness. Street base material shall conform to the thickness as required for the street type on Table 7.8.6. 
3.  Extension. The street base for collector and arterial streets shall extend fully under curb and gutter at least four inches thick, as illustrated. The street base need not extend under the curb and gutter on local streets. For streets without curbs, the base shall extend at least 1 foot beyond the edge of payment. 

4.  Replacement of Unsuitable Materials. Wherever unsuitable material is found in the subgrade, the unsuitable material shall be replaced with graded aggregate stone or other suitable material recommended by a registered Geotechnical Engineer and acceptable to the City Engineer. 
C.  Pavement Topping. 
1.  Roadway Binder. After the base has been inspected and accepted, the roadway or street shall be surfaced with Type "B" binder if required for the street type on Table 7.8.6. 
2.  Tack Coat. Tack coat shall be applied on a prepared asphalted road surface according to the requirements of DOT Specification 413. 
3.  Final Topping. Final topping shall consist of a course of Type "E" asphaltic cement as required for the street type indicated in Table 7.8.6. 
4.  Two-stage Paving. If two-stage paving for residential streets is approved by the Engineering Director, the developer shall place a 2-inch binder course on the street but may delay final paving. 
(A)  Binder Surface Installation. Prior to the expiration of the two year maintenance bond, the binder surface will be primed with suitable asphaltic materials as provided in DOT Specification 412. 
(B)  Surface Installation. After the prime has been inspected and accepted, the roadway or street shall be surfaced with a minimum 1½ inch of Type "E" asphaltic concrete wearing surface. 
5.  Acceptance Prohibited. A surface treatment pavement as a finished wear surface will not be accepted. All asphaltic concrete will be mixed in an asphalt plant complying with applicable and current requirements of the DOT. 
D.  Curb and Gutter. 
1.  Required. 
(A)  New Streets. Curb and gutter are required on all new streets and new construction on existing streets, including acceleration and deceleration lanes and travel lane widenings on both sides of the roadway where required by this Chapter. 
(B)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Curb and gutter are not required for subdivisions with lots of one acre or more and an average lot frontage of at least 200 feet, provided that curb and gutter is required on the radius at all intersections. 
(2)  Curb and gutter may be deleted if the street design is intrinsic to the stormwater management plan and designed using good engineering practice in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
2.  Dimensional Standards. 
(A)  Standards for Local Residential Streets. Local residential street curbs shall be Portland cement concrete, 30-inch standard curbing consisting of 6-inch curb top × 24-inch gutter width × 12-inch back depth, vertical or roll back type, with a minimum strength of 3,000 p.s.i. at 28 days. The street curb may be reduced to 24-inch standard curbing (with a gutter width of 18-inches) for curbing along a low volume local street. 
(B)  Standards for All Other Streets. Curbs along collectors and local commercial or industrial street curbs shall be Portland cement concrete, 30-inch standard curbing consisting of 6-inch curb top × 24-inch gutter width × 12-inch back depth, vertical type only, with a minimum strength of 3,000 p.s.i. at 28 days. 
3.  General Standards. Curbing along streets shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(A)  Line and Grade. Developer's engineer or surveyor shall set line and grade. 
(B)  Expansion Joints. One-half inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 30 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. Control joints/saw cut joints shall be provided every 10 feet of curb length. 
(C)  Special Curbing Design. The Engineering Director shall individually approve special curbing design such as center islands. 
(D)  Installation. Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
(E)  Rejection. Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(F)  Completion. All curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
(G)  Storm Drainage. Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The curb and gutter shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. 
4.  Valley Gutter. A valley gutter may be used across a driveway at its intersection with a street. However, valley gutters shall not be allowed across streets at street intersections unless specifically approved by the Engineering Director. 
E.  Slopes and Shoulder Improvements. 
1.  Streets with Curb and Gutter. On streets with curb and gutter, the shoulders shall slope one-quarter inch to the foot toward the roadway for at least 10 feet from back of curb, and no more than one-half inch to the foot for the remainder of the right-of way width. 
2.  Streets with Ditch Drainage. On streets with ditch drainage, the shoulders shall slope three-quarters of an inch to the foot away from the roadway for at least five feet to the drainage channel. The maximum slope for the drainage channel shall be three feet of run for each one foot of fall, minimum two feet deep, with a minimum two foot wide channel at the bottom of the ditch. Other options are acceptable as contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, volume 2. 
Section 7.8.5. - Street Names. 
A.  Approval of Street Names. 
1.  In no case shall the name for a proposed public or private street duplicate existing street names in Columbus, irrespective of the use of a suffix such as: street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court or other derivatives. 
2.  All street names must be reviewed and approved through the Engineering Department prior to address assignments in order to prevent duplication or confusion with existing streets. 
3.  Proposed streets obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. 
B.  Names for Private Streets and Driveways. 
1.  Private Street Names for Apartments and Businesses. In the case of apartment complexes or corporate entities a private drive or street name may be utilized for addressing purposes provided it is reviewed and approved through the Geographic Information Division (GIS) of the Department of Engineering and provided it meets the minimum safety requirements set forth below. The drive or street shall not serve more than one business or complex and shall be restricted to using a single name and number for the entire complex. 
2.  Minimum Standards for Private Street Name Assignments. In the interest of public safety for fire protection, a private drive/street must meet all of the following minimum requirements to qualify for street name and address assignments: 
(A)  The drive/street shall be clearly delineated with curb and gutter or a minimum 5-foot shoulder for a distance of at least 50 feet measured from the edge of pavement of the public street. The drive/street may not have parking wells immediately adjacent thereto in this distance. 
(B)  The minimum width of paving or concrete shall be 15 feet. 
(C)  The minimum vertical clearance shall be 15 feet. 
(D)  A minimum radius of 50 feet shall be utilized for any horizontal curves. The width shall be widened to 20 feet in these curved areas. All curves should meet the requirements of the AASHTO guidelines, current edition. 
(E)  A minimum 50-foot tangent must be provided between horizontal curves. 
(F)  Any bridge structures must be designed to carry a minimum of 67,000 pounds. 
(G)  Adequate utilities for fire protection must be provided. 
3.  Maintenance Responsibility. The approval of a private drive/street name for address assignment shall not constitute acceptance of responsibility or liability for maintenance of any private drive/street by Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09) 
Section 7.8.6. - Street Name Signs. 
Street name signs of a type approved by the City are to be placed at all intersections. Street name signs shall be installed by the City at the developer's expense on public streets, private streets and driveways. 
Section 7.8.7. - Traffic Signs. 
A.  Compliance with Manual. Traffic control signs shall conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The City shall install these signs at the developer's expense. 
B.  Location. All other intersections shall have stop signs located according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The City shall install these at the developer's expense. 
Section 7.8.8. - Street Addresses. 
A.  Address Assignment. 
1.  Authority to Assign Addresses. The Geographic Information Division (GIS) Division of the Department of Engineering shall have sole authority to assign addresses and notify the appropriate agencies of such assignment. 
2.  Copy of Final Plat Required. A copy of a plat as filed and recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court shall be provided to the GIS Division by the owner prior to any address assignment. 
3.  Timing. A minimum of three business days will be required to process new addresses or changes to existing addresses. 
B.  Posting Addresses. 
1.  Placement of Addresses. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of every building, mobile home or residence to have placed thereon in a place visible from the street (both private and public) numbers at least 2 inches high showing the official address number assigned to that location. 
2.  Change of Address. Upon receiving notice from the GIS Division that an address change is required, the owner or occupant will be required to remove the existing numbers and replace with the new numbers within 60 days of the date of the notice. 
3.  Failure to Post the Correct Address. Failure to post the correct address upon notice will be deemed a violation of this UDO. 
ARTICLE 9. - DRIVEWAY AND DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCES 

Section 7.9.1. - Minimum Standards. 
A.  Single Entrance Roads. A single entrance road to a subdivision shall serve no more than 99 lots. Where the property configuration prohibits or makes impracticable the installation of more than one entrance, the Director of Engineering may waive this requirement following sound engineering practice. Any property owner aggrieved by a determination made pursuant to the standards set forth in this Code Section 7.9.1.A may seek a variance to such standard upon request to Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.8.1.F of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 18-39, § 2, 7-31-18) 
Section 7.9.2. - Driveway Access to City Roads. 
A.  Driveway Entrances. Subdividers or property owners shall obtain a driveway encroachment permit from the Department of Engineering to construct driveway entrances on public street rights-of-way. All construction shall be in accordance with the standards of the Department of Engineering. 
B.  Residential Lot Access to Arterial and Collector Roads. Residential lots in any major or minor subdivision shall have no direct driveway access to a collector or arterial street unless approved by the Council, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway unless approved by the Georgia DOT. 
C.  Reverse Frontage Lots. Reverse frontage lots may be utilized but are not required in major residential subdivisions where direct access to a City street, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway, is not allowed. 
D.  Access Easements. An easement of at least 25 feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be platted along the line of lots abutting any major collector or arterial road in a major subdivision or private street subdivision such that no driveways have direct access to such streets. The backs of the adjacent houses must be screened from view as indicated below. 
1.  Vegetation. The easement may retain its natural vegetation if existing trees and understory shrubs will adequately screen the view of the backs of the adjacent houses. 
2.  Supplemental Vegetation. Supplemental vegetation may be added within the easement to provide adequate screening. 
3.  Earthen Berms. The easement may be improved with a landscaped earthen berm of no less than 4 feet in height. 
E.  Intersection of Driveways with Roads. Driveways shall not intersect adjacent roads at an interior angle less than 60 degrees. 
F.  Gated Entrances. The design of gated entrances, including the location of the gate, shall be approved by the Engineering Department on a case-by-case basis. The distance between the gate and the street, the need for and design of a deceleration lane, and traffic restrictions such as right-in/right-out movements, will be determined based on the anticipated traffic demand and operational characteristics of the facility. 
G.  Location of Driveways. On subdivided lots that access an existing City street, the driveway shall be placed as far as possible from existing road intersections to maximize sight distance. 
Section 7.9.3. - Residential Subdivision Entrances. 
A.  Single Entrance Roads. A single entrance road to a subdivision shall serve no more than 99 lots. Where the property configuration prohibits or makes impractical the installation of more than one entrance, the Director of Engineering may waive this requirement following sound engineering practice. 
B.  Required Additional Entrances Required. 
1.  Multiple Entrances. When more than one entrance is required, the first additional entrance shall be provided to serve up to an additional 150 lots, and each additional entrance thereafter shall be provided for each additional 250 lots. 
2.  Additional Improvements. Alternately, or in combination with additional subdivision entrances, improvements such as dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, signalization, etc., may be required based on the recommendations of a professionally prepared traffic study. 
C.  Subdivisions of more than 20 Lots. All residential subdivisions containing more than 20 lots shall construct a deceleration lane at each entrance to the subdivision on an existing major collector or arterial street. Other subdivisions shall provide offset radii and 50 foot tapers. 
D.  Traffic Impact Study. 
1.  Study Required. Residential major and private street subdivisions exceeding 250 lots shall be required to submit a traffic study to determine if additional improvements such as dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, signalization, etc., are required for safe traffic operations along the City street and at each entrance. 
2.  Additional Steps or Improvements. If the traffic study determines that further steps or improvements should be taken to protect the traveling public, the additional requirements shall be imposed by the Engineering Director. 
Section 7.9.4. - Commercial/Industrial Subdivision Entrances. 
A.  Deceleration Lanes Required. A deceleration lanes shall be installed at all entrance roads into a commercial or industrial subdivision. 
B.  Traffic Impact Study. 
1.  Study May be Required. The Director of Engineering may require a traffic study to determine if the project's size warrants a center turn lane, longer deceleration lane, an acceleration lane or other improvements. 
2.  Required Improvements. If the traffic study determines that further steps or improvements should be taken to protect the traveling public, the Director of Engineering will impose the additional requirements. 
Section 7.9.5. - Driveways for Nonresidential, Multifamily and Mobile Home Developments. 
A.  Deceleration Lanes Required. Service stations and other nonresidential uses, apartment/condo and mobile home complexes shall install deceleration lanes. 
B.  Interior Subdivision Street Access. Service stations and other commercial businesses on corner lots that have frontage on interior subdivision streets shall have access only from the main street. 
C.  Corner Lots. Commercial businesses on corner lots that have frontage on a local or minor collector side street shall install an additional lane out to the intersection if driveway access from said side street is provided. 
D.  Traffic Impact Study. 
1.  Study May be Required. The Director of Engineering may require a traffic study to determine if a center turn lane, a longer deceleration lane, an acceleration lane or other improvements will be necessary. 
2.  Improvements Required. If the traffic study determines that the traffic generated by the project and the existing City street warrants it, the Director of Engineering will require the additional improvements or other mitigating measures. 
Section 7.9.6. - Driveway Access to a State Road. 
Access onto a State road shall comply with existing Georgia DOT requirements, except that the entrance must be paved. A copy of the Georgia DOT permit shall be submitted to the Engineering Department before the plans can be approved. 
Section 7.9.7. - Widening for Development Entrances. 
A.  Minimum Deceleration/Acceleration Lane Width. When required, minimum pavement width, not including curbs, and right-of-way to accommodate acceleration and deceleration lanes at development entrances are established in Table 7.9.1. Only deceleration lanes are required. 
Table 7.9.1  Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes 

 
B.  Measurement of Lane Length. Lane length is measured 200 feet from intersection centerline to beginning of taper. Tapers are 50 feet. Vertical face curb and gutter is required through the radii, excluding the tapers. The additional lane can be stopped at the projected property line if there is inadequate right-of-way or excessive cut or fills to install the lane. In this case, the tapers would start at the projected property line unless excessive cut or fills would encroach on the right-of-way limits of the abutting property. 
C.  Catch Basins. The developer will pay the cost of any catch basins that must be constructed when an existing County road is required to be developed. 
D.  Utilities and Drain Pipes. Utilities and drain pipes shall be relocated at the developer's expense outside of the acceleration/deceleration lanes. Waterlines can remain beneath the additional lanes. 
E.  Completion of Curbing. The area behind all curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
ARTICLE 10. - SIDEWALKS 

Section 7.10.1. - Required Sidewalks. 
A.  Sidewalks; When Required. Sidewalks shall be required in all residential developments and in commercial and industrial developments, except as provided under paragraph B. below. 
B.  Exemptions from Sidewalk Requirements. Sidewalks are not required under the following circumstances: 
1.  No Curb and Gutter. Sidewalks are only required along streets that have street curbs. 
2.  Large Lot Residential Subdivisions. Sidewalks are not required for residential subdivisions in which all of the lots are one acre or more in size and the average lot frontage of all lots is at least 200 feet. 
3.  Short Cul-de-sac Streets. Sidewalks are not required on cul-de-sac streets that are no longer than 300 feet and provide direct access to no more than 10 dwellings. The length is measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the radial center of the circular cul-de-sac turnaround. This exemption does not apply to temporary dead-end streets allowed under Section 7.8.3.H.4. 
4.  Trail System Provided. In conservation subdivisions and planned unit developments, sidewalks may be waived by the Engineering Department for all lots that are otherwise directly connected to an off-street trail system provided within the development. Such a trail system must be provided as a permanent amenity as part of the development, and shall be the maintenance responsibility of the development's homeowners' association. 
Section 7.10.2. - Sidewalk Location. 
A.  Location Adjacent to Property Lines. Sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
B.  Location Adjacent to Curbs. Sidewalks shall be located not less than two feet from the back of curb. 
C.  Location on Street Side. Sidewalks shall be located on east and north sides of streets unless a different side of the street is approved by the Engineering Director to avoid conflicts with utilities or to provide continuity with adjacent sidewalks; provided that there shall be a sidewalk on at least one side of the street. 
D.  Location on Culs-de-sac. Sidewalks along cul-de-sac streets may be terminated at the cul-de-sac turnaround, connecting into the street roadway where the pavement widens from the standard street travelway into the turnaround section. 
Section 7.10.3. - Construction of Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall comply with the construction requirements listed below. 
A.  Width and Thickness. Concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide and 5 inches thick. 
B.  Minimum Strength. Concrete shall be at least 3,000 p.s.i. at 28 days' strength. 
C.  Completion. Upon completion, sidewalks shall be backfilled and grassed. 
D.  Timing of Installation. Sidewalks shall be shown on construction drawings for the streets, and shall be accommodated in grading plans and activities for right-of-way preparation, but may be installed on a lot-by-lot basis after the final plat for the subdivision or phase is recorded. Within a final-platted subdivision, the required sidewalk along each lot frontage shall be installed no later than when the driveway is installed, provided that all sidewalks throughout the final-platted subdivision shall be installed prior to the end of the maintenance period. Sidewalk installation shall provide continuity to adjoining sidewalks as to grades, appearance and construction standards. 
ARTICLE 11. - LOCATION OF UTILITIES AND STREET CUTS 

Section 7.11.1. - Location of Utilities in Streets. 
A.  Above-ground Utilities. Telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must be at least nine feet back from the back of the street curb or edge of pavement and at least one foot back from the edge of any sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
B.  Underground Utilities. Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way in accordance with the City's Standard Utility Location Cross-Section, or as otherwise approved by the Engineering Director on construction drawings for the project. 

Figure 7.11.1 
Section 7.11.2. - Pavement Cuts. 
A.  Review and Approval. All utility construction plans within City right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the Engineering Director. 
B.  Trenches. All trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened. 
1.  Compaction under Paving. Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95% compaction. 
2.  Compaction Elsewhere. Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90% compaction. 
C.  Road Cut Policy. The City's policy is no existing city roads can be open cut unless unusual circumstances warrant it. The Engineering Director shall be contacted for permission to open cut any existing City road, prior to any cut. 
1.  Storm Sewer Installation. Storm sewers 36 inches or smaller in diameter shall be bored. 
2.  Trenches. If the City allows open cutting all trenches under existing paving shall be backfilled and compacted in six inch lifts and excavated to allow for six inches of 3,000 p.s.i. concrete and one and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete to be placed. 
3.  Paving Cut. A paving cut shall be widened to a minimum of 12 inches beyond the edges of the trench and excavated to allow for the six inches of 3000 p.s.i. concrete and one and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete to be placed. 
4.  Edges of Cuts. The edges of the paving cut shall be smooth. 
5.  Final Wearing Surfaces. A final wearing surface of one and one-half inches of Type "E" asphaltic concrete shall be poured and rolled after the concrete is cured. 
ARTICLE 12. - STORM DRAINAGE 

Section 7.12.1. - Stormwater Management. 
The reasons for adopting stormwater management regulations are listed below. 
A.  Health, Safety and Welfare. Surface water runoff can carry pollutants and nutrients into receiving waters. Polluted stormwater discharge has an adverse impact on health safety, welfare and the quality of life. 
B.  Flooding. Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods, endangering roads, other public and private property, and human life. 
C.  Runoff. Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff. These changes may have the following results: 
1.  Stream banks can erode and slump, resulting in widening of streams; 
2.  Tree root systems can be undercut; 
3.  Erosion rates can increase; and 
4.  Streambeds can become more uniform and shallow, providing less varied aquatic habitat. 
D.  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Section 7.12.2. - Objectives and Purpose. 
Objectives and purposes of a stormwater management system are indicated below. 
A.  Regulation. Regulate the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
B.  Protection. Protect, preserve and enhance water quality and fish and wildlife habitat within the service area and downstream receiving waters. 
C.  Water Quantity and Quality. Protect downstream receiving waters from water quality and quantity impacts. 
D.  Compliance with State and Federal Law. Comply with the DNR and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
E.  Best Management Practices. Require development plans to minimize the transport of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by incorporating Best Management Practices into the design. 
F.  Minimize Flooding. Establish procedures that minimize damage from flooding, while recognizing that natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial. 
G.  Construction of Drainage Systems. Require construction of drainage systems that aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems. 
Section 7.12.3. - Prohibited Discharges. 
A.  Prohibited Discharges . It is unlawful, and is a violation of this Section, for any person to throw, drain, run, allow to seep or otherwise discharge to any part of any separate storm sewer system, Waters of the United States, or State Waters or to cause, permit, suffer to be thrown, drained, run, allowed to seep or otherwise discharge into any separate storm sewer system, Waters of the United States or State Waters anything except unpolluted storm water runoff, unless otherwise exempted. 
B.  It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection A. that a discharge of water not composed entirely of storm water resulted or occurred exclusively from one or more of the following sources, activities, or events: 
1.  Full compliance with an NPDES permit, other than the NPDES permit granted to the Columbus Consolidated Government (CCG) for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
2.  Discharges or flows from firefighting. 
3.  Agricultural storm water runoff. 
4.  Water line flushing, excluding a flushing from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means unless: 
(A)  The total residual chlorine has been reduced to less than five mg/L; and 
(B)  The discharge contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection. 
5.  Lawn watering, landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water. 
6.  A diverted stream flow or natural spring. 
7.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater. 
8.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (drain tile or French drain). 
9.  A foundation drain, crawl space pump, footing drain, or sump pump, if the discharge is uncontaminated. 
10.  A potable water source not containing a harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container. 
11.  Air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or other source of pollutant. 
12.  Individual residential car washing. 
13.  Water from riparian habitats or wetlands. 
14.  Water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or other harmful cleaning substance. 
15.  Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or other source of pollutant. 
16.  Swimming pool water that: 
(A)  Has been de-chlorinated so that total residual chlorine is less than five mg/L; and 
(B)  Contains no harmful quantity of muriatic acid (~20% hydrochloric acid) or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of swimming pool water or in pool cleaning. 
17.  A temporary car wash sponsored by a civic group, school, or a religious or other nonprofit organization. 
18.  Industrial Cooling Water under the authorization and direction of the Director of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and appropriate NPDES permit. The temperature of the discharge water shall not vary more than five degrees (Celsius) hotter or cooler than the temperature of the receiving water. 
19.  Other unpolluted water. 
C.  No defense to prosecution is available under Subsection B. if: 
1.  The discharge in question has been determined by the Director, or his or her designee to be the source of a pollutant to the storm water drainage system, waters of the United States, or State Water; 
2.  Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger; and 
3.  The discharge has occurred more frequently than or beyond the limits permitted by the Director on a case-by-case basis. 
D.  In any civil or criminal action, the discharger has the burden of proving that a discharge in violation of Subsection A. is uncontaminated or falls within a defense to prosecution under Subsection B. Prima facie proof that a discharge is uncontaminated must be made in the form of an analysis by a certified laboratory, using standard methods or procedures prescribed by USEPA regulations. A copy of the laboratory analysis must be sent to the CCG Director of Engineering; 
E.  A person commits an offense if he discharges or causes to be discharged into any separate storm water drainage system, waters of the United States, or state water a pollutant or substance that causes or contributes in causing CCG to violate a water quality standard, CCG's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from the CCG's separate storm water drainage system. 
F.  A person commits an offense if he/she discharges or allows or permits the discharge of any of the following into any separate storm water drainage system: 
1.  Used oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid. 
2.  Industrial waste. 
3.  Hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste. 
4.  Domestic wastewater, septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste. 
5.  Garbage, rubbish, or yard waste. 
6.  Wastewater from: 
(A)  Any commercial car wash facility; 
(B)  Any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility (to be enforced beginning January 1, 2016); 
(C)  Any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business, commercial, or public service vehicle (including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment) by a business or public entity that operates more than two of such vehicles (to be enforced beginning January 1, 2016); 
(D)  The washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(E)  Any commercial mobile power washer or the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior if the wastewater contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or other harmful cleaning substance; 
(F)  Floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
(G)  The wash down or other cleaning of pavement if the wastewater contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or other harmful cleaning substance; or 
(H)  The wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of the released material have been previously removed. 
7.  Effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, or emissions filter or the blow down from a boiler. 
8.  Ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material, or hydro mulch material, or wastewater from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying such material. 
9.  Runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area. 
10.  Filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa with a total chlorine residual of greater than five mg/L. 
11.  Swimming pool water that contains: 
(A)  Total residual chlorine of five mg/L or more; or 
(B)  Any harmful quantity of muriatic acid (~20% hydrochloric acid) or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of swimming pool water or in pool cleaning. 
12.  Discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if: 
(A)  The total residual chlorine is at five mg/L or more; or 
(B)  The discharge contains any harmful quantity of another chemical used in line disinfection. 
13.  Fire protection water containing oil or a hazardous substance or material, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge, except that this prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from firefighting by the fire department. 
14.  Water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment. 
15.  Contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard. 
16.  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the storm water drainage system. 
17.  Any discharge from a petroleum storage tank, any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking petroleum storage tank, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of a petroleum storage tank release, unless the discharge complies with all state and federal standards and requirements and does not contain a harmful quantity of any pollutant. 
G.  A person commits an offense if he discharges into any separate storm water drainage system a harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with: 
1.  Clearing, grading, excavating, or other construction activities; or 
2.  Land filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
H.  Illicit Connections. It is unlawful for a person, company, corporation, etc. to connect any pipe, open channel or other conveyance system that discharges polluted water to any separate storm sewer system within Columbus, Georgia. 
1.  All connections to the storm water system shall carry only storm water runoff as defined herein or those discharges exempted under Section 7.12.3.B. All connections must be reviewed for permit prior to work being performed. 
2.  Improper connections in violation of this Chapter must be corrected and redirected to the correct system of conveyance within 30 days at the owner's/operator's expense. If it required to be connected to the sanitary sewer system then approval and proper permits must be obtained from the Columbus Water Works. Proof of that approval shall be presented to the Department of Engineering prior to the commencement of corrective work. The Columbus Water Works has the authority at that time to require the owner/operator to provide pretreatment of the discharge prior to entering the sanitary system. The financial responsibility for the pretreatment system and the relocation of any conveyance system(s) shall be the owner/operator's and not that of the Columbus Consolidated Government or the Columbus Water Works. 
(Ord. No. 15-53, § 1, 10-27-15) 
Section 7.12.4. - Applicability and Exemptions. 
All storm drainage installation and systems shall comply with the requirements of this Article. 
A.  Drainage Required. An adequate drainage system, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
B.  Stormwater Management Plan. 
1.  Plan Required. All persons proposing development or construction in the city shall prepare a stormwater management plan. 
2.  Approval Required. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Engineering Director, except as exempt below. 
C.  Applicability . 
1.  The stormwater management standards listed below are required for any new development and/or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(A)  New development that creates, or adds 5,000 square feet or greater of impervious surface, or that involves land disturbing of 5,000 square feet or greater or, 
(B)  Redevelopment that creates, replaces or adds 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface, or that involves land disturbing activity of one acre or more, including projects less than one acre if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, or, 
(C)  Any commercial or industrial new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, with a SIC or NAICS that requires coverage under the State of Georgia's NPDES Industrial Stormwater Discharge Permitting Program, or a hotspot use as defined below. 
(D)  Redevelopment sites that involve land disturbing of 5,000 square feet or greater, but less than one acre. 
(E)  For the purposes of engineering calculations, replacement of impervious surface shall assume that the site's predevelopment state is "pasture in good condition" or equivalent. 
(F)  These standards will be required of all land disturbing plan applications initially received after January 1, 2016. 
2.  For sites that meet one or more of the above criteria, the permittee shall ensure that the following minimum standards are incorporated into the site plan: 
(A)  Stormwater Runoff Quality/Pollutant Reduction . Stormwater runoff shall be adequately treated prior to discharge. The stormwater management system shall be designed to remove at least 80 percent of the average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) load or equivalent as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Compliance with this performance standard is presumed to be met if the stormwater management system is sized to capture and treat the water quality volume, which is defined as the runoff volume resulting from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall from a site. 
(B)  Stream Channel/Aquatic Resource Protection . Steam Channel and/or Aquatic Resource Protection shall be provided by using the following approaches: 1) 24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 2) erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and 3) preservation of the applicable stream buffer. 
(C)  Overbank Flood Protection . Downstream Overbank Flood Protection shall be provided by controlling the post-development peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 
(D)  Extreme Flood Protection . Extreme Flood Protection shall be provided by controlling the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
D.  Definitions. The following terms have special meaning as used in this Article: 
1.  New development is defined as land disturbing activities, structural development (construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure), and/or creation of impervious surfaces on a previously undeveloped site. 
2.  Redevelopment is defined as structural development (construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure), creation or addition of impervious surfaces, replacement of impervious surface not part of routine maintenance, and land disturbing activities associated with structural or impervious development. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling. 
3.  A hotspot is defined as a land use or activity on a site that produces higher concentrations of trace metals, hydrocarbons or other priority pollutants than are normally found in urban stormwater runoff. Examples of hotspots include gas stations, vehicle service and maintenance areas, salvage yards, material storage sites, garbage transfer facilities, and commercial parking lots with high-intensity use. 
E.  Exemptions. The following development activities are exempt from the minimum stormwater management standards: 
1.  Individual single-family residential lots. (Single-family lots that are part of a subdivision or phased development project are not exempt from the minimum standards); and 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures. 
F.  Additional Requirements . 
1.  New development or redevelopment in critical or sensitive areas, namely watersheds that contribute to Columbus's drinking water source, Lake Oliver, or watersheds listed on the most current 303(d) Impaired Waters list, published by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, may be subject to additional performance and or regulatory criteria. Furthermore, these sites may be required to utilize or restrict certain structural controls in order to protect a special resource or address certain water quality or drainage problems identified for a drainage area/watershed. 
2.  This requirement for additional Best Management Practices (BMPs) or restriction of the use of certain BMPs will be at the discretion of the Director of Engineering or his/her designee on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 15-53, §§ 2, 3, 10-27-15) 
Section 7.12.5. - Minimum Stormwater Management Standards. 
The following standards are the minimum stormwater management performance requirements for new development or redevelopment sites falling under the applicability criteria above. A detailed technical explanation of each minimum standard is provided in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, Section 1.2. 
A.  Use of Better Site Design Practices for Stormwater Management. Site designs should preserve the natural drainage and treatment systems and reduce the generation of additional stormwater runoff and pollutants to the fullest extent practicable. 
B.  Stormwater Runoff Quality. 
1.  All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. Stormwater management systems (which can include both structural stormwater controls and better site design practices) must be designed to remove 80% of the average annual postdevelopment total suspended solids (TSS) load and be able to meet any other additional watershed- or site-specific water quality requirements. 
2.  It is presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this performance standard if: 
(A)  It is sized to capture and treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume, which is defined as the runoff volume resulting from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall from a site; and 
(B)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls are selected, designed, constructed, and maintained according to the specific criteria in this Manual. 
(C)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities is adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls and pollution prevention practices. 
C.  Stream Channel Protection. Stream channel protection shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
1.  24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
2.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and 
3.  Preservation of the applicable stream buffer. 
D.  Overbank Flood Protection. Downstream overbank flood protection shall be provided by controlling the post-development peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm (Minimum Standard #3) is exempted, then overbank flood protection shall be provided by controlling the post-development peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm events. 
E.  Extreme Flood Protection. Extreme flood protection shall be provided by controlling and/or safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. Existing and future floodplain areas should be preserved as possible. 
F.  Downstream Analysis. A downstream hydrologic analysis shall be performed to determine if there are any additional impacts in terms of peak flow increase or downstream flooding while meeting Minimum Standards A through E. This analysis shall be performed at the outlet(s) of the site, and downstream at each tributary junction to the point(s) in the conveyance system where the area of the portion of the site draining into the system is less than or equal to 10% of the total drainage area above that point. 
G.  Groundwater Recharge. Annual groundwater recharge rates should be maintained to the extent practicable through the use of nonstructural methods. 
H.  Construction Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Erosion and sedimentation control practices shall be utilized during the construction phase or during any land disturbing activities. 
I.  Minimum Standard #9 - Stormwater Management System Operation and Maintenance. The stormwater management system, including all structural stormwater controls and conveyances, shall have an operation and maintenance plan to ensure that it continues to function as designed. 
J.  Minimum Standard #10 - Pollution Prevention. To the maximum extent practicable, the development project should [shall] implement pollutant prevention practices and have a stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
K.  Minimum Standard #11 - Stormwater Management Site Plan. The development project shall prepare a stormwater management site plan for local government review that addresses Minimum Standards A through J. 
Section 7.12.6. - Standards to be Used in Designing System. 
A.  Storm Detention Facilities. All development plans will require a hydrology study stamped and signed by a registered engineer or landscape architect. If detention has been waived or provided in a previous section, then a letter with supporting documents should be provided. Permanent detention facilities will be required, and shall be designed so that the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Excess Runoff. The excess runoff created by new development shall be compensated for in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
2.  Water Quality Treatment. Water quality treatment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
3.  Detention Requirements. Detention shall be provided such that the peak rate of flow from the site after development will not exceed the corresponding flow that would have been created by the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency storms prior to development. 
4.  Detention Pond Size Determination. The size, capacity and operational characteristics of a stormwater detention facility shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
5.  Emergency Overflow Devices. An emergency overflow device, excluding the throttling device, for a detention pond shall be designed to pass the 100-year peak inflow without overtopping the dam. 
6.  Minimum Berm Width. The top of the berm shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide when 3:1 slopes are used and 10 feet wide with 5:1 slopes. 
7.  Stability. Slopes shall be stable under all conditions including maintenance, and a minimum 3:1 on City accepted ponds. 
8.  Vegetative Coverage. Full and living coverage of an approved permanent grass devoid of noxious weeds shall be provided. 
9.  Pond Bottom. The bottom of the pond shall be firm enough to be maintained by mechanical means per City standards. 
10.  Access. A ten foot wide access road shall be required around the circumference of the pond, where topography does not prohibit this. The access road shall be located within a 20-foot wide access easement that is deeded to the City, fully accessible to maintenance vehicles, and void of any conflicts with utilities, fences, landscaping and similar items. 
11.  Fencing. Where fences are provided they shall be a minimum 3.5 and 6 feet high. 
(A)  Chain Link Fencing. Commercial gage chain link fence shall be screened. 
(B)  Wood Fencing. If it a wood fence is desired it shall be placed on the lots of the individual property owners. These fences shall be the maintenance responsibility of individual owners and this responsibility shall be shown on the plats and deeds at dedication. 
12.  Hydrological Study. As part of the hydrological study, consideration shall be given to the flow capacity of downstream drainage structures. If the downstream system is inadequate, the developer is required to either improve the down stream drainage structure or provide additional storage in the detention facility. 
13.  Damming. In approved cases the detention may be provided by damming a natural basin with minimal clearing. The required discharge structure opening must be large enough to prevent stoppage from leaves and other debris naturally occurring. Also, the volume should be adequate to account for natural growth of vegetation. 
B.  Storm Drains. 
1.  Sizing and Location of Drainage Structures. Sizing and location of all existing and proposed drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer or landscape architect, subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
2.  Sloping of Pipes. Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of 3 feet per second (fps) so that sediment will not collect. 
3.  Standards for Materials and Installation. Georgia DOT Standard 1030D, or most current standard, shall be used in determining class (concrete) or gauge of pipe under fill, method of backfilling and pipe installation. 
4.  Drainage Formula. The drainage formula used in determining size of drainage structure shall be determined by the developer's engineer or landscape architect according to accepted engineering practice, subject to approval of the City Engineer. 
5.  Certification. A registered engineer or landscape architect shall certify the storm drain pipe sizes. 
6.  Design Storm Event. The 25-year storm event shall be used in designing the storm drains, inlets, cross-drains, etc. that comprise the drainage system. In cases where a spring, creek, or other watercourse traverses the property, the 100-year storm event will be used for design. Lane spread shall be no more than ½ the travel lane width. 
C.  Subdrainage. Subdrainage will be installed to control the surplus ground water by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the ground water level where such conditions exist. 
D.  Bridge Design. Bridges shall be designed for a 100-year storm event. 
Section 7.12.7. - Maintenance of Ponds and Facilities. 
A.  Facilities to be Accepted by the City. If a proposed residential facility or pond is intended for acceptance by the City, then it must be located on a separate lot and deeded to the City along with an access way that is at least 20 feet in width containing the 10-foot wide access road. The access way shall either be a portion of the lot having frontage on a street, or an access easement connecting the lot to a street. The access road shall be constructed to standard specifications of the Engineering Department. The lot need not meet zoning requirements as a buildable lot. 
B.  Variance. A variance from side yard setbacks may be requested from the Planning Division if the 20-foot access prohibits the builders from complying with zoning requirements. 
C.  Petition for Acceptance. The developer should petition the City for acceptance upon completion of construction. 
D.  Bond. A continuous two year maintenance bond to cover the maintenance and construction shall be provided. The bond will remain in effect until released by the Department of Engineering at which time the City will assume maintenance of the facility. 
E.  Perimeter Buffering. The perimeter of the parcel deeded to the City for detention ponds and access shall be planted with good living 4 foot high Burford Holly, Ligustrum Japonicum (wax leaf privet), Leland Cypress, or approved equal and set 4-foot on centers. 
1.  Minimum Maintenance Period. All plants shall be in good living condition at the end of the two year maintenance period and shall have been planted a minimum of one year. 
2.  Extended Warranty for Planting. If the 1 year planting cannot be met then an extended warranty shall be required. 
F.  Maintenance of Private Stormwater Management Facilities . 
1.  The owner/operator of a private stormwater management facility (i.e., a facility not accepted by the City that serves any development) shall perpetually be responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of said facility. Failure to operate or maintain a stormwater management facility in accordance with this chapter shall be a violation of this Chapter. Should it become necessary for the City to perform work (or have a private contractor perform work on behalf of the City) in order to maintain a private facility, then the City may place a lien against the property until full reimbursement for the work performed by City forces, or work paid for by the City, is recovered. 
2.  The owner of a private stormwater management facility shall submit an annual maintenance report to the City. The annual report will document all maintenance and inspection activities conducted by the owner on his/her stormwater management facility(ies) for each calendar year. Blank maintenance and inspection reports, provided by the City, shall be completed by the owner or his/her designee for each facility and returned to the City no later than January 31 of the following year. This requirement applies to all existing and future stormwater management facilities; both inside and outside the Combined Sewer Area and shall go into effect January 1, 2016. The first reports under the requirement will be due by January 31, 2017. Failure to provide the City with an adequate Annual Report by the deadline shall be a violation of this Chapter. 
3.  Maintenance and Inspection standards and schedules expected by the City mirror those found in the most recently published Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). Should prescribed maintenance and inspection activities and recommended schedules not be included in the GSMM, those activities and schedules recommended by the device's manufacturer, at a minimum, will be required. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, § 1, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 15-53, § 4, 10-27-15) 
Section 7.12.8. - Cross Drain Pipes. 
A.  Minimum Size. Cross drain pipes shall be not less than 15 inches in size when under the street. 
B.  Location. A storm drain pipe running parallel to the existing primary road shall not be located beneath any proposed acceleration/deceleration lanes. The Director of Engineering may modify or waive this requirement if unusual circumstances exist such as topography. 
C.  Inlet and Outlet Ends. The inlet and outlet end of all storm drain pipes, shall have concrete flared end sections, concrete headwalls, or mitered ends with concrete collars or slope-paved headwalls that comply with the standards of Georgia DOT. The collars shall be a minimum of four inches thick and extend 18 inches beyond the limits of the pipe. 
Section 7.12.9. - Stormwater Ditches. 
All man-made ditches between storm drain pipes and downstream of storm drain pipes shall be designed by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2. The ditch profile and cross-sections every 50 feet shall be shown on the plans. The plans shall show the velocity and flow at each cross-section. 
Section 7.12.10. - Materials and Installation. 
A.  Materials and Installation. Materials and installation requirements for storm sewer pipes shall conform to Georgia DOT standards or to the specifications of the Engineering Department. 
B.  Construction Standards for Storm Drains. 
1.  All concrete pipe must be reinforced and meet AAS14TO M170. That which is used within the ROW must be Class III. Conditions such as shallow cover or depths that exceed 25 feet may require a higher class pipe. 
2.  Any storm drain structure over 3.5 feet must have steps per the Georgia DOT standards. 
3.  All pipe in storm drain structures shall be struck even with the inside wall. 
4.  Preformed joint sealer, which conforms to AASHTO M198 for Type B flexible plastic gaskets, shall be used in lieu of the mortar jointing method. 
5.  The interior surfaces of all storm drain structures shall be smoothed to an acceptable standard using mortar mixed to the manufacturer's specifications. 
6.  All frames, grates, rings and cover, etc., must conform to the standards set forth in the Georgia DOT specifications. The current Columbus standard for manhole ring and cover is the US Foundry 223 or equal. 
7.  Backfilling of trenches shall be accomplished immediately after the pipe is laid. The fill around the pipe shall be placed in layers not to exceed 6 inches with each layer being thoroughly compacted. All material shall have an in place density of 98%-modified proctor to a depth of 6 inches below the finished grade, and 95%-modified proctor at depths greater than 6 inches below the finished grade. Compaction requirements shall be attained by the use of mechanical compaction methods. Each layer of backfill shall be placed loosely and thoroughly compacted in place. 
8.  All backfill shall be nonplastic in nature, free from roots, vegetative matter, waste, construction material or other objectionable material. Said material shall be capable of being compacted by mechanical means and shall have no tendency to flow or behave in a plastic manner under the tamping blows. 
(A)  Removal. Material deemed by the Engineer as unsuitable for backfill purposes shall be removed and replaced with selected backfill material. 
(B)  Water. Water shall not be permitted to rise in trenches that are not backfilled after the pipe has been placed. 
Section 7.12.11. - Minimum Clearances. 
A.  Culverts. At least two feet between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert (top of pipe) is required under the roadway. 
B.  Pipes in Easements. Pipes included in easements shall have a minimum cover of one foot or at the manufacturers' recommendations. 
C.  Underground Utilities. A minimum of six inches of cover shall be provided between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
D.  Trench Construction. Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with DOT. 
Section 7.12.12. - Driveway Culverts. 
A.  Culvert Required. Driveway pipe shall be sized for the 25-year storm event. 
B.  Pipe Materials. Driveway culverts may be PVC, Reinforced Concrete Pipe or High Density Polyethylene (smooth lined type "S"). 
C.  Inlets and Outlets. The inlet and outlet end of all driveway culverts shall have either flared-end sections or concrete headwalls that meet the standards of Georgia DOT. 
Section 7.12.13. - Field Changes 
Changes in construction plans caused by field conditions shall be made at the direction of the Engineering Inspector as approved by the Director of Engineering with the cost of such changes to be paid by the developer. 
Section 7.12.14. - Monitoring of Industrial Stormwater Dischargers. 
A.  Industrial Stormwater Discharge Permittee Definition . 
1.  Permittees must have a storm water discharge associated with industrial activity from the permittee's primary industrial activity, as identified by Sectors A through AA and AB below. 
2.  Sector AB . This permit also authorizes storm water discharges under Sector AB from any industrial activity designated by EPD where the designation is based on the potential for contribution to a violation of a water quality standard or for significant contribution of pollutants to Waters of the State. Sector AB permittees must be notified by EPD that the permittee is eligible for coverage under Sector AB of this permit. 
3.  Municipally owned or operated industrial facilities must comply with the permit and monitoring requirements for all types of industrial activities that such installations perform. 
B.  Applicability and Exceptions . 
1.  Applicability . 
(A)  Applicability under this Ordinance is limited to discharges from facilities in the sectors of industrial activity summarized below. These sector descriptions are based on SIC Codes and Industrial Activity Codes from USEPA regulations. References to "sectors" in Ordinance (e.g., sector-specific monitoring requirements under the State Industrial Stormwater Discharge Permit) refer to these groupings. Please note: Facilities may be subject to more than one sector. 

 
2.  Exceptions . 
(A)  Applicable facilities located within Columbus-Muscogee County's Combined Sewer Area are not required to obtain coverage under the State of Georgia's Industrial Stormwater Discharge Permit and are therefore exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(B)  Facilities that have satisfied the conditions of "No Exposure Exclusion" are not subject to this Section. 
C.  Notification of Applicability . 
1.  The Columbus Consolidated Government's Department of Engineering will mail notices to applicable facilities each January as a reminder of the specific requirements of this Section. 
2.  Included in this notification will be a compliance summary form (CCG Compliance form) to be used by the facility for reporting purposes. 
D.  Reporting of Regulatory Inspections/Sample Analysis Reports . 
1.  Purpose . 
(A)  The Columbus Consolidated Government is required to develop, implement and maintain an Industrial Stormwater Monitoring Program as a NPDES Phase I Municipal Stormwater Permittee. This Section is designed to fully satisfy that mandate. 
2.  Reporting and Required Documentation . 
(A)  The owner/manager of a covered facility shall submit an Annual Stormwater Compliance Report to the City. This annual report will document all inspection, sampling and maintenance activities conducted by the permittee each calendar year. Blank annual stormwater compliance reports, provided by the City, shall be completed by the permittee or his/her designee for each permitted site and returned to the City by either certified mail or email (stormwaterreports@columbusga.org) no later than January 31 of the following year. This requirement applies to all covered facilities and shall go into effect January 1, 2016. The first reports under the requirement will be due no later than January 31, 2017. 
(B)  Required documentation under this section includes: 
(1)  CCG Compliance Form 
(2)  Signed Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Certification (as required by State permit) 
(3)  Quarterly Visual First Flush Examination Forms (as required by State permit) 
(4)  Annual Laboratory Analysis Summary (if required by State permit) 
(5)  Annual Compliance Inspection Report (as required by State permit) 
(6)  Maintenance Records for Stormwater Management Facilities (see 7.12.7.F.2, ponds, constructed wetlands, proprietary devices, etc.) 
E.  Failure to Report . 
1.  Failure to provide the City with an adequate Annual Stormwater Compliance Report by the deadline shall be a violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-53, § 5, 10-27-15) 
ARTICLE 13. - PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM 

Section 7.13.1. - Connection Required. 
Any single-family or multifamily dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment shall be connected to a public water supply. Water mains and connection to the water supply shall be at the cost of the property owner. The installation of said mains and connection to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street. 
(Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 7.13.2. - Water Not Available. 
Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system acceptable to and approved by the Health Department. 
Section 7.13.3. - Design Criteria. 
Water systems must be designed as outlined by the Columbus Water Works Department. 
ARTICLE 14. - PUBLIC SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

Section 7.14.1. - Availability. 
Any single-family or multifamily dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment shall be connected to public sewer if located within 1,500 feet, or in the written opinion of the Columbus Health Department and the Columbus Water Works that the public sanitary sewer is within a reasonable distance. Said written opinion shall be reviewed by the Planning Department and Engineering Department prior to submission to the requesting party. Connecting into the system and providing sanitary sewer service to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision shall be at the cost of the property owner. The installation of all street sewers shall be installed prior to the paving of the street. Connection shall be at the cost of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 7.14.2. - Sewerage Not Available. 
A.  Easements Required. If sewerage is not available, a 30 foot permanent easement shall be shown on the plans and dedicated to the City of Columbus for future use, in those areas where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a creek or branch whose drainage area is 200 acres or greater. 
B.  Alternative Disposal. An alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community sewage disposal system may be used provided it is in compliance with the standards of the Health Department and the Columbus Water Works. 
Section 7.14.3. - Design Factors. 
Sewers shall be designed according to criteria and design standards provided by the Columbus Water Works. 
Chapter 8 - Land Development Activities 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 8 

[Sec. 8.1.1. - Purpose of Chapter.] 
This Chapter contains the requirements that apply to carrying out the land development process, including site grading and land disturbance activities; addressing flood hazard areas; the installation of streets, drainage facilities and public utilities; and building construction. 
ARTICLE 2. - OVERVIEW OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION 

Section 8.2.1. - Development Activity. 
A.  Preconstruction Activity. Following the issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site, areas required to be undisturbed, such as natural buffers or stream greenways, must be designated by survey stakes, flags, ribbon, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the Department of Engineering prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities. 
B.  Grading. 
1.  Grading Plan Required. Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
2.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Required erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved plans as development progresses. 
Section 8.2.2. - Permits Required. 
A.  Reserved 
B.  Site Development Permit (SDP) . Site Development Permits shall be required for all non-exempt land disturbing activities other than those requiring a Minor Land Disturbing Permit, Work on the Right-of-Way Permit or Access/Encroachment Permit. Site Development permits are required for all projects involving land disturbing activities greater than 5,000 square feet. 
C.  Minor Land Disturbance Permits (MLD) . A Minor Land Disturbance Permit (MLD) may be issued for land disturbing projects with durations less than 2 weeks and that disturb less than 5,000 square feet. 
D.  Street Cut/Work on the Right-of-Way . See Chapter 8, Article 8. E. Access/Encroachment Permit. See Chapter 7, Article 9. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 15-53, § 5, 10-27-15) 
Section 8.2.3. - Development Phase Inspections. 
The owner or contractor shall make requests for inspections to the Engineering Department at least 24 hours prior to when the inspection is needed. Inspections shall be made and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. Inspections are required of each of the following phases, as applicable to the actual work to be performed under the development permit: 
A.  Preclearing Inspection Required. Prior to clearing or clearing and grubbing of the property or any portion included under the development permit, inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures and protective devices for undisturbed areas. Inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures will be conducted on a continuing basis. 
B.  Inspection on Completion of Street Grading. Upon completion of grading for each street section, inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with subgrade preparation. 
C.  Cover Inspection. A cover inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure. 
D.  Stormwater Facilities Inspection. Upon installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities. 
E.  Street Curbing and Gutter Inspections. Inspection shall be requested after the forms or string line have been set. Street width and vertical and horizontal alignment may be spot-checked. 
F.  Sub-grade of Streets. After compaction, the sub-grade shall be roll tested with an 18-ton load on a tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the Engineering Director. 
G.  Street Base. After receipt of compaction test reports by the Engineering Department, the base may be string-lined for depth and crown. The street base may be roll-tested with an 18-ton load on a tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the Engineering Director. 
H.  Paving. An Engineering Department Inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored. 
I.  Failure to Notify. If the contractor fails to make the proper notification, he shall be responsible for the expense of any operation or laboratory testing required by the Director of Engineering to ascertain compliance with the specifications. 
Section 8.2.4. - Record Drawings or As-built Surveys. 
A.  Record Drawings or As-built Surveys. Upon completion of the development activity as authorized by the development permit and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the owner shall submit to the Department of Engineering for review and approval a complete set of record drawings showing "as-built" conditions prepared by a registered land surveyor. Sanitary sewers and the public water system are under the jurisdiction of the Columbus Water Works, and plans shall be submitted to that department. These drawings shall show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment, and finished elevations of the improvements listed below: 
1.  Drainage system pipes and channels; 
2.  Bridges or culverts; 
3.  Stormwater detention facilities; 
4.  Sanitary sewer system (as required by the Columbus Water Works, if any); 
5.  Water system (as required by the Columbus Water Works, if any); and 
6.  Streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
B.  Certification and Seal. The record drawings or as-built surveys shall be certified and sealed by a registered Land Surveyor, subject to the tolerances of accuracy indicated in the survey certification. 
Section 8.2.5. - Final Development Inspection. 
A.  Inspection Required. Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the Department of Engineering shall conduct a final development inspection of the project. 
B.  Certification of Improvements. Prior to filing of a final plat, the subdivider shall be required to certify to the Department of Engineering in writing that all street, drainage and other improvements that are to be dedicated to the City have been completed in accordance with the construction plans previously approved by the Department of Engineering. 
C.  Correction of Deficiencies. The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final subdivision plat. 
Section 8.2.6. - Maintenance Bond. 
A.  Maintenance Bond Required. Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the Department of Engineering is required for all public improvements shown on the as-built surveys. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for two years from the acceptance of the improvements by Council. 
B.  Value of Bond. The value of the maintenance bond shall be equal to five percent of the actual cost of construction of the public improvements shown on the as-built surveys. The cost of construction shall be determined by the Director of Engineering or evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
ARTICLE 3. - SITE CLEARING AND GRADING 

Section 8.3.1. - Site Development Permit Required. 
A.  Permit Required. Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved site development permit by the Engineering Department, as provided in the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance. 
B.  Grading. Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
Section 8.3.2. - Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. 
Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
Section 8.3.3. - Stormwater Drainage Facilities. 
Required stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management site plan as development progresses. 
Section 8.3.4. - Reserved. 
Section 8.3.5. - Earthen Embankments. 
Earthen embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. If necessary in order to obtain this compaction, the contractor shall add moisture to the material as it is placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 90 percent. Floodproofing shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
Section 8.3.6. - Slopes. 
The maximum slope for all cut or fill slopes shall be as provided in Table 8.3.1. The depth of cut referenced in the table shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the Engineering Director. 
Table 8.3.1  Maximum Cut or Fill Slopes 

 
ARTICLE 4. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6, § 1 adopted January 31, 2017, amended Art. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 4, §§ 8.4.1—8.4.9, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 7-13-10. 

Section 8.4.1. - Statement of Purpose. 
Soil erosion and sediment deposition onto lands and into water within the Columbus, Georgia area are occurring as a result of failing to apply proper soil erosion and sedimentation control practices in land clearing, soil movement and construction activities. This sediment deposition results in pollution of waters and damage to domestic, agricultural, recreational, fish and wildlife and other resource uses. The purpose of this Article, as authorized by the legislature of the state of Georgia in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, and as further amended, is to control and minimize the extent of erosion and sedimentation, to conserve and protect land, water, air and other resources and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. The Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted as fully set forth and incorporated by reference herein into this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Best management practices (BMP's) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
City Engineer shall mean the duly designated Director of the Department of Engineering of Columbus, Georgia licensed and registered in Georgia to perform the duties of Engineer, as herein specified, or his duly authorized agent. 
Coastal Marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Cutting means the removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Development permit [means] the authorization necessary to begin a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. See also "site development permit." 
Development project or "project" means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Pine Mountain Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Ephemeral stream means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Section 8.4.6 of this ordinance. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood plain, one-hundred-year means land in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 8.4.3. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcations such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia means that publication of the same name published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440, et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided to EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Owner means the legal titleholder to real property. For the purpose of erosion control, the owner is the legal titleholder of the real property on which is located the facility or site where the construction activity takes place. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Pine Mountain Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-3(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of Rainbow, Brown or Brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (1) permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or (2) temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (3) sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.3. - Exemptions. 
A.  Activities Exempt from Permitting Process. 
1.  This Article applies to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land, including land disturbing activities associated with larger common plan of development or sale with land disturbance equaling to one acre or greater, except for those activities listed in this Section. 
2.  Exemptions as contained in this Section do not authorize any such exempted person to violate the principal of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Act to control and minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. In any event in which significant soil erosion and sedimentation leave the boundary of any project, either by surface or by a storm water system, the issuing authority of this chapter may take such action as is authorized under Chapter 12 of this UDO. 
3.  Further, no provision of this Section shall authorize any person to violate Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or to pollute any water of State of Georgia as defined thereby. 
4.  Where this Section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in Section 8.4.6., the Department of Engineering shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
B.  Exempt Activities. This Article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the activities listed below. 
1.  Surface Mining. Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, Mineral Resources and Caves Act." 
2.  Granite Quarrying. Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
3.  Minor Activities. Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion. 
4.  Single-family Dwellings. Single-family detached dwellings, as provided below: 
(A)  Owner Constructed Single-family Residences. The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy. 
(B)  Other Single-family Residences. 
(1)  The construction of single-family residences when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph. 
(2)  However, that construction of any residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 8.4.6.C of this Article and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a small buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a small buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of this Section of this UDO and the buffer zones provided by this Section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
5.  Agricultural Operations. Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include the following: 
(A)  Raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; 
(B)  Feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; 
(C)  Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens, and turkeys; 
(D)  Producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; 
(E)  The production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; and 
(F)  Farm buildings and farm ponds. 
6.  Forestry Practices. Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a stream buffer, as established in the Environmental Protection Chapter of this UDO, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
7.  Natural Resources Conservation Projects. Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
8.  State of Georgia Road Projects. Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1, except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Columbus Consolidated Government, the Columbus Consolidated Government shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
9.  Electrical Utilities. Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the Federal Energy Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Columbus Consolidated Government shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
10.  Public Water System Reservoir. Any public water system reservoir. 
11.  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Columbus Consolidated Government from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.4. - Application Procedures. 
See Chapter 10, Article 4, for application procedures for land-disturbing permits. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.5. - Plan Requirements. 
See Chapter 10, Article 5, regarding Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plans. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.6. - Minimum Requirements for Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
A.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. 
1.  Control Measures. Plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not excluded by this Section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
2.  Compliance. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the requirements of this Section. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
B.  Best Management Practices. 
1.  Required. Best management practices as set forth in this Section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with Section 8.4.6.B.2 of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  Violations. A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the Columbus Consolidated Government or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on said discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than 10 nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family, which is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than one acre. 
3.  Determination of Violation. Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the Columbus Consolidated Government or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  Monitoring. The EPD Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
C.  Specific Minimum Requirements. The permittee and exempt persons who are required to comply with this Article shall follow, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia in effect as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Vegetation Removal. Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
2.  Cut-fill Operations. Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
3.  Topography and Soils. Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
4.  Natural Vegetation. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
5.  Exposure of Disturbed Area. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
6.  Stabilization. Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
7.  Temporary Measures. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
8.  Permanent Control Measures. Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
9.  Trapping of Sediment. To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
10.  Surface Water Damage. Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
11.  Protection of Adjoining Property. Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
12.  Encroachment of Fill. Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
13.  Crossing of Flowing Streams. Grading equipment must cross-flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in 8.4.6.B.2. 
D.  Sediment Control Ponds. When a pond, either new or existing, is incorporated into a development, the developer shall note on his plans if the pond is to be used for sediment control or retention during construction. If the pond is to be used for sediment control, the developer will be required to dredge, clean and grass the pond upon completion of construction of the project. Further, sediment control devices shall be required to protect downstream property during construction. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Prohibited Land Disturbing Activities. Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year flood plain except in compliance with the Flood Damage Prevention Section of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.7. - Stream Buffers. 
A buffer is established along the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. See the Environmental Protection chapter of this Ordinance for details. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.8. - Education and Certificate. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
Section 8.4.9. - Inspection, Enforcement and Penalties. 
See Chapter 12 for inspection, enforcement and penalties related to land development activities. 
(Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 1-31-17) 
ARTICLE 5. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-53, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, amended art. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. 5 consisted of §§ 8.5.1—8.5.7, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original Unified Development Ordinance. 

Section 8.5.1. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose and Objectives. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Columbus Consolidated Government, of Columbus, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
B.  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Columbus-Muscogee County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
D.  Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07) 
Section 8.5.2. - General Provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the jurisdiction of Columbus-Muscogee County, Georgia. 
B.  Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard. The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto for Fort Benning are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. The Repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at: 
Columbus Consolidated Government Center Annex  420 10 th Street, 2 nd Floor  Columbus, GA 31901 
C.  Establishment of Development Permit. A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance PRIOR to the commencement of any Development activities. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
E.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
G.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Columbus Consolidated Government or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
H.  Penalties for Violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00; and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Columbus Consolidated Government from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 08-9, §§ 1, 2, 3-25-08) 
Section 8.5.3. - Administration. 
A.  Designation of Ordinance Administrator. The Director of Engineering is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Permit Procedures. Application for a Development Permit shall be made to the Director of Engineering on forms furnished by the community PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application Stage. 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 8.5.3.B(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction Stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Director of Engineering shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the Director of Engineering shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 8.5.2.B, then the Director of Engineering shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Section 8.5.4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 8.5.3.B(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with 8.5.3.B(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the Director of Engineering shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section 8.5.3.B(1)(c) and Section 8.5.4.B(2) or D(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Director of Engineering shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Director of Engineering and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07) 
Section 8.5.4. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
A.  General Standards. In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated Buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
B.  Specific Standards. In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New residential construction and/or substantial improvements to residential structures. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest adjacent grade at an elevation higher than the base flood elevation and the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article 4, Section A (4), "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential Construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Section 8.5.3.C(6). 
(3)  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Section 8.5.4.A(6) above.) 
(d)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 8.5.4.B(3)(a) [through] (c), above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 8.5.2.B, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(b)  ONLY if Section 8.5.4.B(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 8.5.4. 
C.  Building Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-zones). Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 8.5.2.B, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 8.5.2.B, then the Director of Engineering shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 8.5.4. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 8.5.4.A(4) "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The Director of Engineering shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
D.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO zones). Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 8.5.2.B, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 8.5.4.A(4), "Elevated Buildings". The Director of Engineering shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Section 8.5.3.B(1)(c) and 8.5.3.B(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
E.  Standards for Subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
F.  Standards for Placement of Critical Facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07) 
Section 8.5.4.1. - Variance Procedures. 
A.  The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the Columbus Consolidated Government shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Director of Engineering in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Muscogee County, Georgia, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
H.  Conditions for Variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Director of Engineering shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07) 
Section 8.5.5. - Definitions. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Director of Engineering's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and, or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Section 8.5.2.B. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 1, 1983. [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 1, 1983. [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 1, 1983 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 1, 1983. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § 1, 8-21-07) 
ARTICLE 6. - INSTALLATION OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES 

Section 8.6.1. - Timing of Installation. 
Construction of the stormwater system shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
Section 8.6.2. - Location. 
Drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in a perpetual unobstructed easement of appropriate width. 
Section 8.6.3. - Off-site Drainage Facilities. 
Stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quality or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this Ordinance may be discharged into drainage facilities off site of the development, subject to the conditions listed below. 
A.  On-site Management. It is not practicable to completely manage runoff on site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
B.  Design, Construction and Maintenance. Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
C.  Cost Sharing. Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of the facilities. The developer may be required to pay a portion of the cost of constructing facilities as a condition to receiving approval of the stormwater management site plan. 
Section 8.6.4. - Maintenance and Ownership Responsibilities. 
A.  Ownership. 
1.  Private Ownership Required. Any stormwater management facility that services a single lot or commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. 
2.  Residential Areas. Developers of stormwater management facilities in residential areas may petition the City to accept maintenance of those private facilities if those facilities meet current standards. In order to consider acceptance, the City must determine compliance with the standards listed below. 
(A)  Ownership. The City is granted ownership of the parcel of land on which the stormwater management facility is located. Ownership is to include a minimum of a 20-foot right-of-way access to the facility. 
(B)  Standards of Construction, Operation and Maintenance. The facility meets current standards for acceptance at the time of petition. 
(C)  Repair and Cleanliness. The facility is in good repair and is clean prior to acceptance. 
(D)  Ease of Maintenance. The facility is easily accessible for maintenance. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Maintenance Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management site plan during construction and for a two year maintenance period following approval of the final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as applicable. If the developer takes the extra measures defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the maintenance period may be reduced to one year. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities at the completion of the construction. 
2.  Maintenance Bond. A continuous bond to cover maintenance and construction shall be provided at acceptance. The bond will remain in force until the criteria, described in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, have been complied with, as determined by the Department of Engineering. 
3.  Maintenance following Two Year Period. The owners of the property shall be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management site plan to remain after construction is complete, following the two-year maintenance period. 
4.  Failure to Maintain. Should an owner or developer, whichever is the responsible party, fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management site plan, then the Department of Engineering shall notify the responsible party in writing within three days of the deficiencies and of specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
(A)  Failure to Perform Maintenance. If the responsible party fails to perform the required maintenance work within 10 days then the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Liens. Should it become necessary for the City to perform work in order to maintain a private facility then the City may place a lien against the property until full reimbursement for the work performed by City forces is recovered. 
C.  Inspections. 
1.  Schedule of Inspections. A representative from the Department of Engineering shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the stormwater requirements. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  An initial inspection prior to stormwater management site plan approval; 
(B)  A bury inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure; 
(C)  Erosion control inspections as necessary; 
(D)  A finished inspection when all work, including installation of drainage facilities, has been completed; and 
(E)  A maintenance inspection of private facilities to insure their continued proper operation. 
2.  Entry for Inspections. A representative from the Department of Engineering shall be permitted to enter all properties, including those for which the City holds a negotiated easement for repairs and maintenance, for regular inspections in accordance with this Chapter. The engineering representative shall duly notify the owner/operator of said property, or representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
3.  Inspection Reports. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a permanent file located in the office of the Department of Engineering. All such records shall be open to the public. 
ARTICLE 7. - INSTALLATION OF STREETS AND UTILITIES 

Section 8.7.1. - Grading. 
A.  Grading Required. All streets shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
B.  Preparation of Roadway. Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
C.  Grading shall be done in accordance with Article 3 of this Chapter. 
Section 8.7.2. - Installation of Utilities; General Provisions. 
Installation of utilities shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Installation Schedule. After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines shall be staked by the developer's registered land surveyor. 
1.  Underground Utilities. All public utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
2.  Manholes and Valve Boxes. All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
3.  Private Utilities. All private utilities that will cross under street pavement, driveways or sidewalks shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate in accordance with each utility company's sleeve requirements and the City's locational standards. See Chapter 7 regarding the location of utilities in streets and the City's Standard Utility Location Cross-Section. 
4.  Service Connections. Service connections for sanitary sewer and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
B.  Manholes and Valve Boxes. All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
C.  Locations. All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout shown in the standard details. 
D.  Private Improvements. Private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall not be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the Engineering Director. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they become damaged. 
Section 8.7.3. - Installation of Public Water System. 
A.  Requirement for Installation. When installation of water mains and connection to a public water supply is required under Chapter 7, the installation of mains and connection to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street. 
B.  Unavailability of Public Water Supply. Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system acceptable to and approved by the Health Department in accordance with Chapter 7, at a fire flow acceptable to the Fire Department. 
Section 8.7.4. - Installation of Sanitary Sewerage. 
A.  Requirements for Installation. When provision of sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision is required under Chapter 7, the subdivider shall install all street sewers serving lots in the subdivision prior to the paving of the street. 
B.  Unavailability of Sanity Sewer Service. When, in the written opinion of the Columbus Health Department and the Columbus Water Works, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternative method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community disposal system may be used provided it is in compliance with the standards of the Health Department in accordance with Chapter 7. 
Section 8.7.5. - Location and Protection of Existing Underground Utilities. 
It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate the underground utilities and to protect them. A contractor shall be responsible for payment of any costs repair to utility lines or services damaged during construction. 
Section 8.7.6. - Street Installation. 
A.  Subgrade Installation. After the earth work has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
B.  Subgrade Materials. If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the appropriate Engineering Department and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
C.  Preparation of Subgrade. 
1.  Compaction. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95% density. 
2.  Construction Traffic. When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of Number 3 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
(A)  Use as Base Material. This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
(B)  Use or Removal. This material may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
3.  Delay in Paving. Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed, subject to the criteria listed below. 
(A)  Berm Sections. A break in the berm section shall be provided when the curbing has not been constructed. 
(B)  Piping. Six-inch pipe sections shall be used to provide drainage under curb to side slopes. 
(C)  Abutting Property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
D.  Installation of Street Base, Curbing and Paving. Street base, curbing and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this UDO. 
Section 8.7.7. - Protection of Shoulders. 
A.  Installation of Vegetative Cover. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. Steep slope areas shall be sodded or otherwise appropriately treated. 
B.  Construction Completion. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
Section 8.7.8. - Traffic Control Devices and Street Lights. 
A.  Fees and Installation. Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided through payment of fees to the Engineering Department. Traffic control devices may also be installed by the developer after receiving written approval from the Director of Engineering. 
B.  Approval of Fixtures. The installation of all street lighting fixtures within the right-of-way must be approved by the Director of Engineering prior to such installation. 
Section 8.7.9. - Foreign Material on Streets. 
A.  Removal of Foreign Materials. The developer, builders, or homeowners shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete, and related materials off the pavement and curbing of existing city or county roads during construction of buildings in all developments covered by this UDO. 
B.  Removal of Litter and Trash. Before the streets are accepted by the City, all litter and trash shall be removed from the dedicated rights-of-way and surrounding areas. 
Section 8.7.10. - Bridge Piling. 
Bridge piling shall be driven to DOT load standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by registered professional engineer. 
Section 8.7.11. - Burial of Construction Debris Prohibited. 
Burial of construction debris or debris of any kind at the site of any construction or development is prohibited. 
ARTICLE 8. - REPAIR, INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION ON ALL RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Section 8.8.1. - Regulations Adopted. 
The following regulations apply to all work done on all public rights-of-way. Said work shall be permitted through the Department of Engineering in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO). Work done on designated U.S. or Georgia State Highways shall be permitted through the Georgia Department of Transportation with a Courtesy Copy of the permit forwarded to the Engineering Department by the permittee, at least 24 hours prior to work beginning. All work done on any right-of-way in Muscogee County must comply with all local as well as state and federal regulations. After review by the Columbus Consolidated Government, other issues pertaining to the work may be cause for permits to be issued under different sections of this UDO. 
Section 8.8.2. - Scope. 
A.  This Article applies to all work done within the limits of the right-of-way for what ever reason, including but not limited to maintenance, reconstruction, relocation or installation of structures or facilities whether above or below ground level, work done by utility companies or their designated representatives, citizens, developers or their contractors, landscaping services, tree trimming, yard maintenance and any other work done within the limits of the City right-of-way. 
B.  This Ordinance shall apply to all utility companies that have facilities and/or do work within the city including all utilities who currently hold "Franchise Agreements" with the Columbus Consolidated Government, and contractors working for utility companies or private companies. 
C.  Private contractors desiring to do work on the right-of-way shall: 
1.  Be a Licensed Contractor; 
2.  Have a valid Business License to work in Muscogee County; 
3.  Be bonded and have appropriate insurance; and 
4.  Obtain all proper permits from the Columbus Consolidated Government and or the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
D.  Private Citizens doing work for themselves at their place of residences may be exempted from being licensed and bonded, but a permit may be required, dependant upon the work to be done. 
Section 8.8.3. - Application. 
A.  A Permit shall be required from the City Engineer to work on any public right-of-way within the city. A copy of the approved permit shall be kept on site by the permittee or his contractor. Upon completion of the work the permittee shall notify the Department of Engineering by either faxing or mailing a copy of the front sheet of the permit application to the Department. 
B.  Work done on Rights-of-Way that are not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Columbus Consolidated Government from other agencies, when the following conditions apply: 
1.  Work done on a designated State or Federal Highway shall obtain a permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation or other appropriate agency. 
2.  Work done on roadways that are listed on the "Transportation Improvement Plan", or have received funds from the State or Federal Government for improvement, shall obtain permits from the Georgia Department of Transportation or other appropriate agency. 
3.  A courtesy copy of the approved permit issued by the other agency shall be forwarded to the Department of Engineering by the permittee, prior to beginning work. 
4.  All local and State Ordinances concerning construction practices, safety, erosion control, air quality and stormwater management shall be in effect regardless of whether the permit was issued by the Columbus Consolidated Government or another agency such as the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
5.  In some cases a separate permit over and above the permit for Work on Right of Way may be required by the Columbus Consolidated Government regardless of who has jurisdiction over the immediate Right of Way on which the work occurs because of the impact that the proposed work may have on other local ordinances. There are no exemptions from full compliance with all local ordinances regardless of whether a permit has been issued by the City. 
C.  Work done within the limits of a new development, before the development is accepted by the City, shall be covered by the Development Permit. However should the work extend beyond the limits of that development onto existing public right-of-way, a Work on Right-of-Way Permit shall be required. The designer of the development has the option of indicating where work will extend beyond the limits of the development onto public right of way and thus have said work covered under the Development Permit. This coverage must be agreed to in advance of the issuance of a Development Permit. 
D.  When a new development is accepted by the City and the right-of-way is opened to the public, then subsequent work done by anyone on the newly opened right of way will require a Work on Right-of-Way Permit. 
E.  Application documents required are as follows: 
1.  Completed application, including an emergency number and local point of contact from the permittee. The point of contacts shall be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, including weekends and holidays. 
2.  The permittee shall provide a drawing showing the location of the proposed work with enough detail to quickly identify the exact limits of the proposed work. The application and the drawing must include a current address and distance from the nearest intersection. A database will be established using the address as one of the primary methods of location. 
F.  A Traffic Control Plan must be attached or made a part of the permit by reference of a previously approved Traffic Control Plan in accordance with the appropriate Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) layout of Temporary Traffic Control Devices as discussed below. 
1.  All temporary traffic control shall be set up in accordance with Part 6, of the MUTCD, current edition. 
2.  All Traffic Control Personnel (flaggers) shall have a current certification of training from the Georgia Department of Transportation or the National Safety Council. Proof of certification shall be maintained on the flagger's person while on the job. The City may check for current certification at any time. 
3.  The project foreman shall have a current certification of training from the Georgia Department of Transportation or the National Safety Council. Proof of certification shall be maintained on the foreman's person while on the job. The City may check for current certification at any time. 
4.  The project foreman shall insure that all traffic control devices are set up in accordance with the MUTCD, Current edition. A copy of the MUTCD section covering the Traffic Control setup shall be on site and in the possession of the project foreman at all times. 
5.  Improper setup of traffic control devices may result in citation of the project foreman or the permittee and immediate shut down of the project. 
G.  Additional information including, but not limited to profiles, cross sections or any other information needed by the City to make a proper assessment of the situation before issuing a permit may be asked for by the Department of Engineering at any time. Such information shall be provided before a permit will be issued. 
H.  The permittee shall note that coordination with the City Arborist has occurred and shall identify possible conflicts with existing trees on the drawing. It is the responsibility of the permittee to review the work site and indicate the presence of trees. 
I.  Permits for work on right-of-way shall become void if work has not started within 90 days of the issue date of the permit. Any work started after the 90 days shall require a new application for permit. If work is begun after the permit expires and no new permit has been applied for then the work is considered "work without a permit" and appropriate citations or other enforcement may apply. 
J.  Street Cuts Only. Work that is confined to the paved travel way shall require a separate Street Cut Permit describing the cut in the pavement. The minimum information shall be the size and location of each cut. (i.e. 10' × 6' cut in asphalt in front of 1212 12th Avenue). Work confined in the street may be permitted by using the "Street Cut Permit" application form, rather than the work on right-of-way application. 
Section 8.8.4. - Exceptions. 
Approved permits shall be required for any work done on the right-of-way. Permits should be approved at least 48 hours before the work is to begin, but in no case shall work begin without a minimum of 24-hour notice, with the following exceptions: 
A.  Emergency Work. In case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the City via telephone, fax or email the next working day if the emergency occurs after normal business hours or the same day during normal business hours. In addition the permittee shall begin the process of obtaining a written permit for the emergency work not later than one working day after emergency work begins. 
1.  For the purpose of this UDO an emergency may be defined as a situation where there is an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of a person or property. 
2.  Needed repairs that were not previously part of an ongoing maintenance program, and area not acted on within the same working week as reported (Monday through Friday) will not be considered "emergency work" but shall be considered planned maintenance/repair. In these cases the standard permit procedure shall apply and the permit shall be obtained prior to commencement of work. 
3.  Normal scheduled maintenance and planned projects by the permittee do not constitute emergency work and as such are not subject to this exception. 
B.  Minor Work. Written permits shall not be required for the work described in this paragraph. The permittee is exempted from the requirement of obtaining a permit only, but is not relieved from the responsibility of complying with all requirements of this Article and other ordinances governing work in the city. Violations of this and other ordinances shall be grounds for Stop Work Orders and/or Citations. 
1.  Traffic control and Erosion and Sediment control shall be established and maintained in accordance with this UDO and other ordinances to which they apply. 
2.  The permittee shall notify the Engineering Department via telephone, fax or email of minor work done. Such notification should be done 48 hours prior to work commencing but shall be done no later than the close of business on Friday of the week in which the work occurs. Notification may be in the form of a copy of a company work order. The notification must include as a minimum the addresses of the work and a brief description of the work. (i.e. setting a meter or valve maintenance, etc.). Examples of exempted work are as follows: 
(A)  Open cut work that is confined to one side of the street and does not require a street crossing or encroachment into the paved portion of the street or does not involve work running parallel to the right-of-way a distance of greater than 60 feet or does not extend beyond the limits of one lot in a subdivision, which ever is most restrictive is exempt. 
(B)  Tree trimming or aerial line maintenance along a roadway is exempt. When work is done to overhead lines special attention must be given to traffic control since in most cases the work crew are constantly moving along the roadway or are occupying a spot for a short duration of time. 
(C)  Routine maintenance to overhead and underground utilities that does not require cuts within the travel way is exempt. 
(D)  Valve or Manhole inspection or maintenance that does not require the cutting of the street and will only be in a location for 15 minutes or less. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 8.8.5. - Design Specifications. 
Construction methods should be used that minimize disturbance and impact to the City's right-of-way and private property. All items pertaining to construction methods that are not specifically addressed in this Article shall comply with the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia Standard Specifications of Construction of Roads and Bridges, 1993, or most current edition. 
Section 8.8.6. - Traffic Control. 
The permittee as well as all parties involved, including the utility his contractor and paving contractor are responsible for installation and Traffic Control shall be maintained throughout the process of the work from the initial cutting of maintenance of proper traffic control in accordance with the MUTCD. A copy of the MUTCD current edition may be available on line. 
A.  Two-lane Residential Streets. 
1.  Two-lane Residential Streets having less than 1,000 vehicles per day will be allowed to post traffic controls per MUTCD for one lane traffic, provided 500 feet of sight distance is available at the road closure point. Traffic volumes shall be estimated at 6 trips/vehicles per day, per house along said street and/or subdivision streets blocked by road closure. 
2.  Two-lane Residential Streets having more than 1,000 vehicles per day that have an open cut that must be left open overnight, shall have the cut covered with steel plates. Traffic volumes shall be estimated at 6 trips/vehicles per day, per house along said street and/or subdivision streets blocked by road closure. The plates shall be secured to prevent shifting. 
3.  Two-lane streets where the abutting property is zoned and actively used as Commercial property shall require the use of steel plates to cover open trench/cut which have not been repaired with asphalt or backfilled as described in alternated method number 2. No exceptions. Plates shall be anchored to prevent movement. 
B.  Multi-lane Streets. Where street closure is required on multilane roadways, all traffic control in accordance with MUTCD including lighted arrow boards shall be used at all times during and after working hours. 
1.  The permittee is responsible for installing correct warning devices and for maintaining said warning devices and barricades on all work on right-of-way until the work is completed and the roadway is either permanently or temporarily repaired and opened to traffic. The traffic control shall be set up in accordance with the latest version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. If flaggers are required, then they must be Georgia DOT certified or certified by the National Safety Council. All flaggers shall have proof of certification on their person at all times when they are working on any part of the City right-of-way. The requirement for proper certification will be in effect the same day this ordinance is adopted by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
2.  It is desirable that no trench/cut be left open through a weekend, however in the event this situation is unavoidable, appropriate traffic control including detours, flashing arrows or steel plates shall be provided. The contractor/owner shall make available a 24-hour contact to the City Engineer and all emergency services. 
C.  Sidewalk. 
1.  During Working Hours—Proper walkways over cuts or bridges shall be used to allow pedestrian traffic through work area. The permittee shall use warning signs, barricades and constructed detours to control, warn and direct pedestrians through or around the work site. All pathways shall be accessible by wheel chair. 
2.  After Working Hours—Cuts or openings in sidewalks shall not be left openings after working hours but shall be backfilled to the normal surface with compacted clean backfill material. 
Section 8.8.7. - Open Cut Technology—Roadways. 
Open Cut of a roadway is prohibited for new installations unless site conditions warrant it or as otherwise approved by the Department of Engineering. The open cut method may be used for repair of existing facilities. Repair of Open Cuts in paved roadways may be done one of the two methods described herein: 
A.  Alternate Method 1 (concrete cap) General Construction Procedure. 
1.  The cut is to be made, the work one the buried structure completed then the cut shall be backfilled with good, dry local material from the original cut. If the material from the cut is wet or unsuitable then material approved by the City Engineer shall be used to backfill the hole. 
(A)  Permanent repair of the cut shall be an additional 6 inches wide on each side to a depth of 7½ inches to provide for the placement of a concrete bridge (cap) to reduce differential settlement. Refer to the current detail on file in the Department of Engineering. 
2.  The backfill material shall be placed in 6 inch lifts and compacted to 100% of the SPD, beginning at the bottom of the cut and continuing to within 7½ inches below the finished surface of the roadway. The permittee shall take special care to maintain the optimum moisture content and control the thickness of each lift compacted. 
3.  Compaction testing shall be done as directed by the City Engineer on a random basis or may be required when there is suspicion that there may be a problem with the backfill or that the compaction is not adequate or done in accordance with the specifications. Testing shall be done by a certified testing firm acceptable to the City. The City shall pay for initial random testing. 
4.  Temporary Patch. A temporary patch material may be used in the cut to bring the roadway surface up to normal grade. In the event that weather prohibits a timely permanent repair from being completed, the permittee shall make permanent repair as soon as practical but in no cases longer than 45 days from placement of the temporary patch. All roadway cuts shall be permanently repaired within 45 calendar days as measured from the dated that the hole is backfilled and compacted. The permittee is responsible for continuous maintenance of the cut and any claims of damage to vehicles or property while the temporary patch material is in place. The permittee shall continue to be responsible for maintenance of the cut and claims of damage to vehicles or property for the warranty period. 
5.  Permanent Patch. Six (6) inches of class "A" concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 p.s.i, shall be placed in the trench/cut on the compacted backfill material. Sufficient curing times shall be allowed for the concrete before placement of the asphalt surface course but the final 1½ inches of permanent asphalt shall be placed within 5 working days after the concrete is placed. Allowances for additional time will be considered by the City Engineer when sufficient cause is given for the delay of placement of permanent asphalt. The permittee may elect to use a concrete mix design containing additives to produce accelerated curing. Mix designs shall be submitted to the Department of Engineering for approval prior to use. The permittee is responsible for having an approved testing laboratory design a mix design for an altered curing time. 
6.  Specifications: 
(A)  Specifications for Concrete. Concrete used on city streets shall be "Class A" concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 p.s.i. Slump shall be within the range of 2 inches minimum to 4 inches, maximum. The top surface of the concrete shall be left a minimum of 1½ inches below the existing surface of the roadway to allow for placement of a permanent hot mix asphalt. A permanent hot mix asphalt patch 1½ inches thick shall be placed and compacted using approved compaction equipment over the concrete cap. 
(B)  Asphalt Specifications. Asphalt will be 1½ inches thick or 165 lbs/square yard, Type E or other suitable mix approved by the City Engineer. 
(C)  Specifications for Point Repair Cuts. Point repair cuts in the pavement shall be a minimum of 3 feet wide each way when alternate method 1 is used. The additional width on each side of the cut is to allow for placement of the concrete bridge. When alternate method 2 is used the cut shall be a minimum of 2 feet wide each way. The minimum width is to allow room for compaction equipment to be properly used during the backfilling of the hole. 
B.  Alternate Method 2 (select backfill) General Construction Procedure. 
1.  The trench/cut shall be backfilled in 6 inch lifts using M-10 stone as defined by the Georgia Crushed Stone Association. Alternate backfill materials may be substituted with prior written approval from the Engineer. All Backfill material shall be compacted to 100% of the SPD for the entire depth of the trench/cut. Moisture shall be added to each lift as the trench/cut is filled in order to achieve maximum compaction. 
2.  The trench/cut shall be filled and compacted to within 1½ inches of the street surface level with M-10 material. Temporary patch material shall be placed and compacted on the select backfill. 
3.  Once the trench/cut is filled and temporary patch material is placed, then the roadway may be opened for traffic. 
4.  Upon approval by the Engineer, the permittee may substitute Graded Aggregate Base material as defined in the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, Standard Specifications construction of Roads and Bridges, 1993 or most current edition; Section 815—Graded Aggregate, in lieu of M-10 stone. 
C.  Temporary Patches. 
1.  The permittee shall fill the trench/cut to within 1½ inches of the roadway surface and place approved "cold mix" as a temporary patch, then open the roadway for traffic. 
2.  Within 45 days of placement of the temporary patch material, the permittee shall excavate the patch to a depth of 1½ inches below the surface of the roadway, and place 1½ inches of hot mix asphalt as a permanent patch. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 8.8.8. - Open Cut—General Specifications. 
A.  When using concrete bridges (caps), the entire base area and sides shall be tack-coated prior to any placement of asphalt. 
B.  Patching will be permitted on days when weather is satisfactory. When placing concrete, the temperature of the air shall be 40 degrees and rising. When placing asphalt, the temperature of the air shall be 40 degrees and rising. 
C.  All trench/cut shall be excavated to the minimum size as specified in this ordinance, depending on the type of patching used for final closure. Refer to "Design Specifications" for Alternate Methods 1 and 2 for details. Narrower trench/cut may be approved by the Department of Engineering if smaller compaction equipment is available. All backfill shall be tamped in 6-inch lifts, to 100% of the s. Compaction testing shall be done in accordance with Section 8.8.7; paragraph. 
D.  All cuts shall be made to maintain a square or rectangular configurations. No round cuts will be accepted. 
E.  Asphalt cuts. The preferred method of cutting streets is to saw the asphalt. However pneumatic tools such as jack hammers may be used if the appearance of the cuts are satisfactory to the Engineer. When cutting of asphalt is allowed by methods other than sawing, the requirement for straight cuts with vertical sides shall not be waived. All cuts shall be smooth, uniform cuts. If ragged or jagged edges are left or vertical sides are not apparent on the cut, then sawing or otherwise smoothing the face of the cut shall be done by the permittee. No cut shall be less than 2 feet by 2 feet on the surface, to allow for proper patching and compaction. 
F.  Concrete cuts. All cuts in concrete paved surfaces shall be saw cut smoothly in a square or rectangular shape. No round cuts will be accepted. 
G.  No cleated equipment is to be used on paved surfaces. Special care shall be taken to protect pavements from damage by equipment. 
H.  Holes that are Drilled or bored in the roadway surface for the purpose of locating buried lines or other purposes shall be filled to the surface with a non shrink grout slurry mix having a compressive strength of 1,000 p.s.i. minimum. 
Section 8.8.9. - Excavated Material. 
A.  Excavated material stored on the roadway surface shall be cleaned from pavement surfaces and the surface shall be swept to the satisfaction of the field inspector. Under no circumstances shall the roadway be washed clean. The permittee shall use all available means to protect inlets from the infiltration of sediment into the drainage system including the use of approved filter barriers placed to protect the openings of inlets and pipes. 
B.  Excavated material stored on the shoulder of the roadway shall be removed completely and damaged vegetation shall be restored immediately. The method of restoration for vegetation shall be approved by the inspector and may include seeding and mulching, sod or placement of fiber or jute blankets. 
C.  Under no circumstances shall excess material be placed in or obstruct a drainage way including curb and gutter, or block access (ingress and egress) to someone's property. Excavated material from a job site shall be removed by the permittee by the end of each business day. 
D.  Drawing Number E-905 or current standard is on file in the Department of Engineering and shall be the standard detail for patching specifications. 
Section 8.8.10. - Resurfacing. 
A.  The permittee may be required to resurface all or portions of roadway where work has been performed. Roadways that are identified on the "Reconstruction List" for the City shall not require resurfacing by the permittee. Roadways that are not listed on the "Reconstruction List" shall be resurfaced by the permittee when they meet the following criteria: 
1.  In a block where linear cuts, running parallel to the centerline of the street and where these cuts extend more than 30% of the entire block length, the permittee responsible for these cuts shall at their expense resurface the street within the block affected. 
2.  In a block in which 3 or more street openings are made by a single permittee, owner, developer or their designated contractor. The permittee, owner or developer responsible for these cuts shall, at their expense, resurface the affected area. The exact limits shall be determined by the Engineering Department. This shall apply to all streets not on the "Reconstruction or Resurfacing List." 
3.  The Reconstruction or Resurfacing List shall be furnished to all stake holders who request it annually. The list will contain a prioritized list of streets that the City hopes to resurface with in the coming 2 fiscal years. The list will for resurfacing at least 2 years in advance. Should priorities change the same stake holders will be notified by the City by receiving an updated list of the street priority. 
B.  The resurfacing shall consist of a minimum of a one and one-half 1½ inch Type F (165 lbs/square yard) overlay of asphaltic concrete. Other mixes may be approved by the Engineer as needed. The resurfacing shall extend for the entire affected block length and shall be a minimum of one lane wide and a maximum the entire roadway width. The actual length of overlay may be adjusted at the discretion of the City Engineer. The resurfacing requirement may be waived if the street is programmed for Resurfacing or Reconstruction. 
C.  Cutting of roadways within the first 2-year period following an overlay is prohibited without written permission of the City Engineer. Emergency cuts within a 2-year period on roadways that have been resurfaced may require the permittee to resurface a portion of that roadway at his expense. A cut shall be defined as excavation of the roadway surface that is a minimum of 2 feet by ½ the width of the travel lane. "Pot holing" for locations of underground utilities prior to trenchless installations are not considered cuts. 
Section 8.8.11. - Responsibility for Utility Structures located on City Right-of-Way. 
The Utility Company that owns the structure shall be responsible for the maintenance of all utility manholes, valve boxes, pipes, conduits etc. for the life of the structure. 
A.  Warranty and Permittee Responsibilities. Trenches/cuts in roadways shall be warranted by the permittee for a period of 2 years after the permanent patch is accepted by the City. The permittee shall notify, in writing, the Department of Engineering that the permanent patch has been placed and is ready for inspection/acceptance. 
B.  The Department of Engineering shall inspect the patch for quality of workmanship and acceptability of material. The inspection must take place before the warranty period can begin. 
C.  The Department of Engineering shall keep a list of the date that permit work is completed as reported by the permittee. The date that the Department receives the notice of completion shall begin the 2-year warranty period for roadway patches. At the end of the warranty period the Department of Engineering will notify the permittee that the warranty has expired. The warranty shall expire on the last day of the month in which the permittee notifies the Department of Engineering that the work has been completed. The warranty period shall not begin until the Department receives notification in writing from the permittee of the work completion. Until such notification is received the permittee remains responsible for the roadway patch. 
D.  Failure of a patch due to causes other than base and paving failure shall be addressed as noted below. If failures of the patch are caused by failures of a buried utility, then the owner of the utility is responsible as noted below: 
1.  Failure of roadways due to failure of structures such as manholes, valve boxes, pipes, conduits, etc., shall be the responsibility of the owner of the structures. The owner is expected to repair the damaged roadway as well as the structure to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
2.  Failure of patches after the 2-year warranty period that occur due to decay or failure of a utility structure, for what ever reason, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the structure to repair. 
Section 8.8.12. - Trenchless Technology. 
Directional Drilling - Backwash created by directional boring shall be controlled by use of proper erosion control measures including capture and proper disposal of backwash using a vacuum truck or other pre approved methods. Backwash shall not be discharged into any part of the storm sewer system including ditches, or onto the street, gutter or sidewalk. Boring, auguring or any other type subsurface means of utility installation shall be used for the following: 
A.  Installation of new underground utilities in areas that have established vegetation, i.e., landscaping, established lawns, etc. Replacement or upgrading of existing utilities where the existing utility shall remain in place and/or abandoned. 
B.  Road crossings except where conditions prohibit the process of directional drilling or boring. 
C.  Installation of new underground utilities in areas that are within the drip line of any trees on the right-of-way. A minimum depth of 3 feet is required to protect the roadbed and critical root zone for trees unless otherwise approved due to subsurface conditions. The City Arborist shall be notified of any trenching/cutting done within the drip line of a tree before the work is begun. (Refer to Chapter 4 of this UDO for more detail.) 
Section 8.8.13. - Driveways. 
A.  Replacement of Driveways. Driveways are to be replaced in accordance with standard details for driveway installation. Details may be obtained from the Traffic Engineering Department. When an existing driveway must be cut and removed to access an existing utility, the driveway shall be replaced using the following standards: 
1.  Residential driveway. Residential driveways shall be replaced with 5-inch, Class A, 3,000 p.s.i. concrete in accordance with current standards for driveways. 
2.  Commercial driveway. Commercial driveways shall be replaced with 6-inch, Class A, 3,000 p.s.i. concrete in accordance with current standards for driveways. 
3.  Asphalt driveways. Asphalt driveways shall be sawed and replaced in a uniform manner on a compacted base to match existing driveway cross section. 
4.  [Replacement.] All driveways must be replaced with special care taken to satisfy property owners. Driveway removal shall be accomplished by saw cutting at the nearest joint. Driveways shall be replaced in accordance with standard driveway details used by the City. 
B.  Notification to City Arborist. The City Arborist shall be notified when it becomes necessary to remove and replace driveways within the drip line of trees. The Arborist shall direct the best way to remove and replace the driveway in order to have the least negative affect on exiting trees. Should a tree be damaged to the extent that removal of the tree is required, then the permittee shall be responsible for its immediate removal and disposal. 
Section 8.8.14. - Sidewalks. 
A.  When a section of sidewalk has to be removed, the existing sidewalk shall be saw cut to a neat line, perpendicular to the centerline and the surface of the concrete slab. Existing concrete shall be cut along the nearest existing construction joint. The sidewalk shall be replaced with a minimum 4-inch thick, 3000 p.s.i. concrete. The concrete shall be reinforced with fiber mesh and match the width of adjoining existing sidewalks. In no case shall sidewalks be replaced to a width of less than 4 feet measured perpendicular to the centerline of the sidewalk. If the existing sidewalk has a thickness of greater than 4 inches, the new sidewalk thickness shall match the existing sidewalk thickness. 
B.  When the work is done that requires the removal of an existing sidewalk within 20 feet of a roadway intersection, the Director of Engineering shall require that the sidewalks shall be replaced, including handicap ramps, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Sidewalks that are replaced shall comply with the ADA concerning widths, access ramps, and driveway crossings. 
C.  The City Arborist shall be notified when it becomes necessary to remove and replace sidewalk within the drip line of trees. The Arborist shall direct the best way to remove and replace the sidewalk in order to have the least negative affect on exiting trees. Should a tree be damaged to the extent that removal of the tree is required, then the permittee shall be responsible for its immediate removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 8.8.15. - Curb and Gutter. 
A.  When the work is done that requires the removal of existing curb and gutter at roadway intersections, and there is a sidewalk existing at that location, a handicap ramp shall be installed as part of the replacement of the curb and gutter. Sidewalks shall be reconstructed or modified of in such a way as to accommodate the new handicap ramp. If there is no sidewalk at that location where the existing curb and gutter are removed, then a handicap ramp shall be installed and said ramp shall terminate at a logical connection to a sidewalk as determined by the Director of Engineering. All handicap ramps shall be built in compliance with the current Americans with Disabilities Act. 
B.  Curb and gutter shall be saw cut to a neat line, perpendicular to the centerline of the curb. The new work will be neatly joined to existing surfaces so as to form an even unbroken plane between the two. Curb and gutter shall be poured separately from concrete patches and driveway aprons. Joint material shall be provided as necessary. The linear dimension of a curb and/or gutter cut and replaced shall be a minimum of 5 feet. 
C.  The City Arborist shall be notified when it becomes necessary to remove and replace curb and gutter within the drip line of trees. The Arborist shall direct the best way to replace the driveway in order to have the least negative affect on exiting trees. Should a tree be damaged to the extent that removal of the tree is required, then the permittee shall be responsible for its immediate removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 8.8.16. - Grassed/Landscaped Areas. 
A.  No trenching/cutting should be done for new installations within the critical root zone of any tree on City right-of-way. The critical root zone is considered to be, the root system within the drip line. Any work within this area shall be coordinated with the City Arborist prior to commencement of work. When it is anticipated that the presence of trees will interfere with the planned work, the permittee shall furnish proof of coordination with the City Arborist at the time the application is submitted. The Arborist may require a plan showing the approximate location of trees located on City right-of-way. This plan should include size and species of trees and vegetation affected. A site visit by the City Arborist and a representative from the construction company/utility may be substituted in lieu of the detailed plan at the discretion of the City Arborist. 
B.  Trees that are damaged by work on the right-of-way shall become the responsibility of the permittee and shall be immediately removed and possibly replaced in accordance with the Tree Preservation and Replacement requirements of Chapter 4. Coordination with the City Arborist is required in all cases where trees are damaged. 
Section 8.8.17. - Erosion Control. 
Erosion control measures shall be maintained in place throughout the job and after completion of the work until permanent vegetation is established. The permittee shall be responsible for stabilization of all work areas by use of vegetation or other approved means. The permittee shall be responsible for replanting if vegetation does not begin growing within 30 days after the work has been completed. If temporary grassing is used then permanent grassing shall be provided at the earliest possible growing season. All permanent grassing shall be like kind for all disturbed areas to include sod where sod is located. The permittee may be required by the City Engineer to install ground cover material such as jute mesh or other matting in critical areas. 
A.  Linear Projects. 
1.  All work shall be completed as it progresses along the route. All trench/cut work shall be backfilled and compacted to a 100% of the Standard Proctor Density, (SPD) under the roadway and 90% along the shoulder not under the roadway. Trench/cut shall be kept backfilled and at no point be more than 1 day behind the installation of utility lines or pipes. 
2.  Linear Trenchless Projects that have excavated points along the route for tie in to existing utilities or have points of connection along the route shall backfill and compact these holes within 5 calendar days of the excavation unless a time extension is granted by the Director of Engineering. Final grassing is not required at this time however temporary erosion control measures shall be placed and maintained until permanent stabilization is completed. 
B.  Non-Linear Projects. As work progresses all holes shall be backfilled and compacted to 100% of the SPD under the roadway and 90% along the shoulder not under the roadway. 
C.  On all projects that disturb the City right-of-way the, permittee shall install temporary and/or permanent vegetative measures in accordance with the season, within 5 working days following backfill and compaction of the trench/cut. All debris and excess material shall be cleaned and hauled from the site prior to installing vegetation or within 5 working days of completion of the work which ever is sooner. 
D.  Spoil that is not hauled away by the end of each day may be left on the job for further use on the job if all spoil stockpiled on site is contained at the end of each working day in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. No spoil shall be left exposed or uncontained so that it may run into a drainage system during a rain event. 
E.  For underground construction and maintenance, the permittee and/or his contractor are responsible for restoring disturbed areas as close as possible to original condition. This includes the replacement of grassing, shrubs, trees, etc. within kind species. Repairs and/or replacements of existing structures and irrigation systems that are located on the right-of-way are the responsibility of the permittee or their designated contractor and shall also be replaced. 
Section 8.8.18. - Responsibility and Liability. 
A.  Progress and Completion on Work. 
1.  The permittee shall repair all open cuts immediately following completion of construction with temporary patching material. Permanent patching material shall be placed no later than 45 days following completion of work. This includes repairs to existing driveways, sidewalks, roadways, etc. The Department of Engineering shall be notified in writing upon completion of permanent patching unless otherwise provided by the Director of Engineering. 
2.  Variances on the required time of repair may be issued when in the judgment of the City Engineer, circumstances warrant a variance. The Department of Engineering shall be notified by the permittee when work is completed. 
B.  Liability and Quality Control. 
1.  Any damage or claim of damage from anyone due to work on right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the permittee. 
2.  The permittee shall be held responsible for insuring that all cuts are satisfactorily completed. Failure to comply will result in non-issuance of further permits and/or issuance of a citation for violation of this Ordinance. 
3.  The permittee shall be responsible for scope and quality of work performed by their subcontractors. Including, but not limited to compaction, erosion control and traffic control. Subcontractors shall be licensed in Columbus, bonded and insured. 
4.  The permittee is required to notify affected parties and the Department of Engineering when extensive construction is going to be performed in the area. Notification shall be done at least 7 days prior to commencement of construction. 
5.  Where necessary to temporarily close full operations of a roadway, the permittee/contractor shall notify Traffic Engineering Division at least 14 days in advance. When emergency repair work is required the notification requirement is waived. However the permittee shall be responsible for contacting and coordinating with all emergency services such as 911 and the emergency locate service, Metra for rerouting of buses, Public Service Department for rerouting of Sanitation trucks, and Muscogee County School district for re routing of school busses. If emergency closure is required during the normal business day then the Department of Engineering and the Traffic Engineer shall be notified as well as all emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 8.8.19. - Penalties. 
A.  Upon determination that a violation of this Ordinance has occurred, the Department of Engineering may do one or more of the following: 
1.  Issue an oral or written warning that a violation has occurred and issue a timeline for the violation to be corrected. 
2.  Issue a citation for the violation. 
3.  Halt progress of a project immediately and have the permittee remove all equipment and personnel from the work site until such time as violations are corrected. 
B.  If after the verbal warning the violation is not corrected in the specified time then a written citation will be issued. A separate citation may be written for each day of violation. 
C.  Any violator shall be required to restore the disturbed area to an acceptable condition. If corrective action is not taken within 72 hours, the Department of Engineering may direct City forces be used to take corrective action with the cost of such action being charged to the appropriate party. 
D.  See Chapter 12, Administration and Enforcement, of this UDO for further details on penalties and fines for violations of these provisions. 
ARTICLE 9. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 

Section 8.9.1. - Building Permit Required. 
A.  Issuance of Permits. When required, building permits shall be issued in conformance with the technical codes adopted and amended by the City under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act. Refer to Sec. 8-14.4 of the Columbus Code for Building Permit Requirements and Fees. 
B.  Relocation or Movement of Structures. A permit is required for the movement of any house, structure or building. 
C.  Airport Requirements and Building Permits. Applicants for a building permit or for variances pertaining to airport requirements shall submit written approval from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as required. 
D.  Changes to Historic Properties. Material changes in the appearance of any historic property shall not be made until approval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
E.  Building Permits for Areas Served by On-site Sewage Disposal Systems. For any structure served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit issued by the Muscogee County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a Building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the Muscogee County Health Department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
F.  Lots of Record. Building permits shall only be issued on lots of record, as defined in this Development Ordinance. 
G.  Zoning verification. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a verification shall be obtained. The following information shall be reviewed prior to this action. 
1.  Single-family or two-family "Duplex" Dwellings. For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat of the lot showing the outline of the principal building and minimum building setback lines for the lot. 
2.  Multi-family or nonresidential Buildings. For a multi-family or nonresidential building, the site plan upon which was granted project approval by the director of Inspections and Code. 
3.  Street Address. A street address number as assigned by the Geographic Information System Division (GIS). 
H.  Simultaneous Application and Review. An application for a building permit may proceed simultaneously with and application for project approval of a site plan, but the permit may not be issued prior to project approval of such site plan by the Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 17-20, §§ 2, 3, 5-9-17) 
Section 8.9.2. - Building Inspection. 
A.  Scheduling a Building Inspection. Inspections shall be scheduled with the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement at least 24 hours before the inspection is needed. Requests for inspection should include the street address, lot number, building permit number, and type of inspection. 
B.  Required Inspections. The following types of inspections are required by the City. 
1.  Foundation. Verify minimum required building setbacks, footing, and trenches dug and reinforcing steel in place. 
2.  Plumbing Connections. Water supply line and sewer lateral in slab foundation. 
3.  Framing. Completion of all rough-ins and after insulation is installed. 
4.  Interior Walls. Interior walls may not be covered until the inspections listed below are completed. 
(A)  Mechanical. Rough-ins complete with pressure test on gas line. 
(B)  Electrical. Rough-ins with neutral, ground, and service cable wired. 
(C)  Plumbing. Rough-ins complete and all fixtures installed. 
5.  Final Inspection. Building is complete and ready to occupy. 
Section 8.9.3. - Construction in Flood Hazard Area. 
A.  Requirements for Construction. Construction of a structure within a flood hazard area for which a permit has been issued shall be governed by the following criteria. 
1.  Certification of Elevation. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Director of Engineering a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. 
2.  Preparation. Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
3.  Floodproofing. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional engineer or architect. 
B.  Work at Risk. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the development permit holder's risk. 
C.  Floor Elevation Survey. The Director of Engineering shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. 
1.  Deficiencies. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the development permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. 
2.  Failure to Submit. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
Section 8.9.4. - Certificate of Occupancy Required. 
A.  Issuance Required. A certificate of occupancy must be issued prior to the occupancy or use of any new or newly renovated building or structure, in accordance with the Development Review Procedures and Permits Chapter of this Ordinance. 
B.  Temporary Certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building may be issued, provided no violation exists in the portion to be approved, under such rules and regulations as may be established by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
Chapter 9 - Development Review Bodies 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 9.1.1. - Applicability. 
Unless otherwise provided by the City Code or this UDO, the requirements of this Article shall apply to all development review bodies. For the purposes of this Chapter, a development review body is the Council of Columbus or a body appointed by the Council and charged with responsibility for providing an advisory recommendation on or approval of an application, certificate of appropriateness, permit or similar development request. 
Section 9.1.2. - Meetings to be Public. 
All meetings of development review bodies are subject to the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. All meetings of all development review bodies shall be subject to the provision of adequate public notice and open to the public, except those limited matter specified by law to be discussed in executive session. 
Section 9.1.3. - Minutes and Records of Meeting. 
All development review bodies shall maintain minutes of meetings, and the minutes shall be open to the public. The minutes shall indicate the vote or abstention of each member on all questions or issues subject to a vote. The minutes shall indicate the presence or absence of each member. 
Section 9.1.4. - Other Records. 
Each development review body shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, and all such records shall be open to the public. 
Section 9.1.5. - Rules of Procedure. 
Each development review body shall adopt such rules of procedure as are necessary to conduct all assigned duties and responsibilities. Rules of procedure shall be consistent with applicable laws, rules and regulations of the City and the State of Georgia. The latest edition of Roberts' Rules of Order shall determine the order and conduct of business at all meetings. 
Section 9.1.6. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of each development review body shall constitute a quorum, and a majority of the members present shall be sufficient to vote upon all questions before each body. If these land development regulations establish a higher number of members for a quorum or an affirmative or negative vote, those requirements shall prevail. 
Section 9.1.7. - Public Notice. 
Public notice of meetings or public hearings by a development review body shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 10. 
Section 9.1.8. - Terms of Office, Appointments and Operations. 
A.  Terms of Office and Appointment. The terms of office and manner of appointment of members, functions and duties of all development review bodies shall be established by resolution or ordinance of the Council. 
B.  Removal. The Council may remove any member of a development review body from office after two consecutive absences, upon the recommendation of the affected body, or on the Council's own motion, as it deems appropriate. 
C.  Vacancies. Any vacancy on a development review body shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the term. 
Section 9.1.9. - Conflict of Interest. 
All members of development review bodies, including alternate members, shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in the laws of the State of Georgia, the City Code and the Code of Ethics, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BODIES 

Section 9.2.1. - Duties of Development Review Bodies. 
The development review bodies shall exercise the authority provided in Table 9.2.1 below. 
Table 9.2.1  Summary of Development Review Authority 

 

 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 12-53, § 9, 12-4-12) 
Section 9.2.2. - Council of Columbus. 
The Council of Columbus shall exercise those powers and duties as provided by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia General Assembly, the Charter, the Code of Ordinances and by this UDO. 
Section 9.2.3. - Planning Advisory Commission. 
The Planning Advisory Committee (PAC) shall exercise the powers and duties of this Section. 
A.  Name. The name shall be the Planning Advisory Commission of Columbus, Georgia. 
B.  Composition, Appointment and Compensation . 
1.  Composition . The Planning Advisory Commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the Council. 
(A)  Term of Office . All regular member appointments shall be for three years. Current membership and terms of office shall not be affected by the adoption of these land development regulations. 
(B)  Number of Terms . An appointed member who has served two consecutive full terms shall not be eligible for reappointment until the lapse of 12 months from the end of the second full term. 
2.  Compensation . Members shall not receive compensation for their services. However, the members may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Authorization of expenses shall be made by the Director of Planning. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The Commission exercises the powers and duties as listed below. 
1.  Comprehensive Plan. To recommend to the Planning Department and the Council a Comprehensive Plan or parts thereof for the development and redevelopment of the City and approval, approval with conditions or denial of requests to change the text of the plan or amendments to the Future Land Uses Map. 
2.  Rezonings (Amendments of the Official Zoning Map). To recommend to the Planning Department and the Council an Official Zoning Map for the City and approval, approval with conditions or denial of any requests for amendments to the Map. 
3.  Unified Development Code. To recommend to the Planning Department and the Council, a unified development code and amendments thereto to establish zoning districts; provide for permitted, special exception and prohibited uses; provide for density and intensity of development; to provide for bulk, height and setbacks for buildings; provide for the subdivision of land; provide for protection of the environment; establish standards related to the development of land; and for similar purposes to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
4.  Modification of Development Approvals. To recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of modifications to development approvals previously granted to the Council. 
5.  Special Exception Uses. To recommend to the Planning Department and the Council approval, approval with conditions or denial of applications for special exception use approval. 
6.  Official Map. To recommend to the Planning Department and the Council an official map of the City. 
7.  Other Duties. Perform such other duties and matters as may be directed by the Council, may be required by these land development regulations, or as may be required by ordinance. 
D.  Officers. The Planning Advisory Commission shall elect a Chair and such other officers as deemed necessary. The Commission shall establish the term of office of the Chair and other officers. 
E.  Meetings. Meetings of the Planning Advisory Commission shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Commission may determine. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Section 9.2.4. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall exercise the powers and duties of this Section. 
A.  Name. The name shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of Columbus, Georgia. 
B.  Composition, Appointment and Compensation. 
1.  Composition. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the Council. The members shall not be employees or officials of the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
2.  Term of Office. All regular member appointments shall be for three years. Current membership and terms of office shall not be affected by the adoption of these land development regulations. 
3.  Number of Terms. An appointed member who has served two consecutive full terms shall not be eligible to for reappointment until the lapse of 12 months from the end of the second full term. 
4.  Compensation. Regular members shall not receive compensation for their services. However, the members may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Authorization of expenses shall be made by the Director. 
C.  Officers. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect a Chair and shall appoint a Secretary. The Board shall establish the term of office of the Chair and Secretary. The Secretary may be an employee of the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
D.  Meetings. 
1.  Scheduling of Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. 
2.  Witnesses, Oaths and Testimony. The Board shall have the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the giving of testimony. 
3.  Contempt. In case of contempt of any party, witness or other person before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board may certify such fact to the Superior Court of Muscogee County. The judge of this court may punish such person in the same manner as contempt of the Superior Court. 
E.  Powers and Duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall exercise the powers and duties listed below. 
1.  Appeals of Administrative Decisions. The BZA shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or agency in the enforcement of these land development regulations. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the final decision by an administrative official or agency. 
(A)  Effect of Appeal. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action or decision appealed until a decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(B)  Method of Appeal. An appeal shall be filed as provided in Chapter 10 of these land development regulations. 
(C)  Decision. The Board may affirm or reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, the decision appealed or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination. 
2.  Variances. 
(A)  The BZA may authorize a variance that shall not be contrary to the public interest, unless such authority is granted to another body by this UDO. 
(B)  The BZA shall not have the authority to: 
(1)  Grant a variance to authorize the use of a parcel or building in a manner that is not permitted by the zoning district in which the parcel or building is located; 
(2)  Grant a variance from the additional standards applicable to permitted or special exception uses as provided in Chapter 3 of these regulations; 
(3)  Grant a variance from any condition or stipulation included as part of a development approval granted by the Council or by any other development review body; and 
(4)  Grant a variance within a planned development district, unless authorized by this UDO. 
3.  Other Duties. The BZA shall perform such other duties as may by required by this UDO. 
F.  Appeals. 
1.  (A)  Appeal to Council. Appeals to council shall conform to Section 4.4.26 of this ordinance. 
(B)  Wireless Communication Facilities. A decision by the Board regarding an administrative appeal may be appealed to Council. The appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of final decision by the Board. 
2.  Appeal to Superior Court. An appeal of a final decision by the Board on a request for a variance shall be made to the Superior Court of Muscogee, Georgia. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 5-25-10) 
Section 9.2.5. - Uptown Facade Board. 
The Uptown Facade Board (UFB) shall exercise the powers and duties of this section. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the UFB is to provide and protect continuity in design and preserve the architectural integrity of the properties subject to the Board's jurisdiction. 
B.  Name. The name shall be the Uptown Facade Board. 
C.  Facade Defined. The term facade means that visual portion of the front or principle exterior surface of a building that faces a public way. The facade includes all architectural and construction features visible from any point on a public way outside of the building, including without limitation structural materials, facing materials, windows, doors, trim, sills, steps, railings, cornices, moldings, fences and other decorative features. 
D.  Composition, Appointment and Compensation. 
1.  Composition. The UFB shall consist of nine members appointed by the Council. The voting members shall not be employees or officials of the Columbus Consolidated Government, and shall be composed of the following: 
(A)  One representative from the Historic Columbus Foundation; 
(B)  Two representatives of Uptown Columbus, Inc.; 
(C)  Six representatives of the Uptown Business Association; and 
(D)  Nonvoting members from the Planning Division, the Inspections and Code Enforcement Division, and the Columbus Housing Authority. 
2.  Term of Office. All regular member appointments shall be for three years. Current membership and terms of office shall not be affected by the adoption of these land development regulations. 
3.  Number of Terms. An appointed member who has served two consecutive full terms shall not be eligible to for reappointment until the lapse of 12 months from the end of the second full term. 
4.  Removal. The term of a Board member may be terminated by the Council after three consecutive absences and upon a recommendation from the Board. 
5.  Compensation. Regular and alternate members shall not receive compensation for their services. However, the members may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Authorization of expenses shall be made by the Director. 
E.  Officers. The Board shall elect a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary who shall serve for a term of one year each and are eligible for reelection. The Secretary may be appointed by the Board from among the voting members. 
1.  Duties of the Chair. The Chair shall preside over the Board and shall vote only in the event of a tie. 
2.  Duties of the Vice-Chair. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair. 
F.  Meetings. Meetings of Board shall be held every third Monday at 3:00 p.m., and at such times as the Board may determine. 
G.  Quorum, Decisions and Procedures. 
1.  Quorum. A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum. 
2.  Decisions. All decisions on applications for certificates of facade appropriateness must be made by a majority vote of the Board members present. 
3.  Procedures. The Board may adopt bylaws for their own organizational procedures consistent with the ordinances of Columbus and laws of the State of Georgia. 
H.  Jurisdiction. The Board's jurisdiction shall include all properties within the UPT and the CRD zoning district as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 
I.  Powers and Duties. The UFB shall exercise the powers and duties listed below. 
1.  Facade Standards. The Board shall develop and adopt standards governing those elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, preservation and maintenance that affect the facades of the properties with their jurisdiction. 
2.  Certificates of Facade Appropriateness. The Board shall review all applications for certificates of facade appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of subsection J below. 
3.  Sign Permit in the UPT and CRD Districts. The Board shall approve, approve with conditions or deny sign permits in the UPT and CRD zoning districts. 
J.  Certificate of Facade Appropriateness Required. A material change in the appearance of any property within the Board's jurisdiction shall not be made unless the Uptown Facade Board has approved an application for certificate of facade appropriateness. 
1.  Forms. The Department of Planning shall provide application forms for certificate of facade appropriateness. 
2.  Contents of Application. The application supporting materials accompanying an application shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(A)  Listing of all proposed work activities; 
(B)  Listing of all materials; and 
(C)  A scaled graphic drawing illustrating work to be performed. 
3.  Review. 
(A)  Board Members. The application and supporting materials shall be provided to Board members ten days in advance of the meeting at which the application is to be considered. 
(B)  Review Criteria. The Board shall approve an application and issue a certificate of facade appropriateness if it finds that the proposal meets the requirements of this Section. In making this determination, the Board shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic and architectural value and significance of the structure; 
(2)  The architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved with the structure and relationship to the interior architectural style; 
(3)  The consistency with design guidelines adopted by the Board; and 
(4)  Pertinent features of other structures within the Board's jurisdiction. 
(C)  Board Decision. The Board shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of facade appropriateness within 30 days after the Department of Planning receives a complete application. 
(1)  Approval. Evidence of approval shall be the issuance of the certificate of facade appropriateness by the Board. 
(2)  Failure to Act. Failure of the Board to act within 30 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(D)  Denial of Application. If the Board denies an application, it shall provide a written statement of its reasons such action and provide a copy to the applicant. 
(1)  The Board may suggest modifications or alternative courses of action upon denial of an application. 
(2)  The applicant may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time. 
(E)  Effect of Denial of an Application. The denial of an application for a certificate of facade appropriateness shall be binding upon the Building Official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits. Building permits shall not be issued for any work for which a certificate of facade appropriate has been denied. 
4.  Landmark Properties. Prior to construction or a material change in the appearance of any property designated as a landmark site by these land development regulations or by the Official Zoning Map shall require approval by both the Uptown Facade Board and the Board of Historic and Architectural Review. 
5.  Visual Compatibility Factor. Within the Board's area of jurisdiction, new construction and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed in color, shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which they are visually related. 
6.  Variations from Standards. 
(A)  Variations Authorized. Due to unusual circumstances, if the strict application of any provision of this Section or any standards adopted by the Board would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of a specific property or structure, the Board may grant a variation from such standards. 
(B)  Standards for Variations. If a variation, modification or interpretation is considered, the Board shall utilize the standards listed below in reaching a decision: 
(1)  The property shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section; 
(2)  The architectural integrity or character of the property or structure shall be conserved; and 
(3)  Substantial justice done. 
(C)  Stipulations and Conditions. In granting a variation, the Board may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this Section. 
7.  Exemptions. 
(A)  Maintenance and Repair Allowed. The requirements of this Section shall not be construed so as to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property or building, provided such activity that does not involve a material change in design, material or exterior. 
(B)  Permitted Use of Property. The requirements of this Section shall not be construed to prevent a property owner from making such use of the property that is not prohibited by these land development regulations or other applicable statues, ordinances or regulations. 
8.  Appeals. 
(A)  Appeal from a decision of the Uptown Facade Board shall be made within 30 days to the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in Section 10.11.7 of this ordinance. 
(B)  Prior to consideration of an appeal by the by the Board of Zoning Appeal from a decision by the Uptown Facade Board, advance written notice of the time, date and location of the meeting at which the appeal is to be considered shall be provided by the Director. 
9.  Penalties and Remedies. Failure to comply with the requirements of this Section shall be addressed as provided in Chapter 12 or using such remedies, including civil remedies, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 5-25-10) 
Section 9.2.6. - Tree Board. 
A.  Establishment of Tree Board. A Tree Board is hereby established to be composed of eleven members appointed by the Council. 
1.  Appointments and Length of Terms. 
(A)  Length of Term. All appointments shall be for a three-year term, except for the initial terms as provided in this Section. 
(B)  Initial Terms. The initial term shall be considered a full term in accordance with Section 2-1 of the City Code. The initial appointments shall be as follows: 
(1)  Four members appointed for a three-year term to terminate December 31, 2004; 
(2)  Four members appointed for a two-year term to terminate December 31, 2003; and 
(3)  Three members shall be appointed for a one-year term to terminate July 1, 2002. 
2.  Considerations for and Basis of Membership. 
(A)  Considerations. The Mayor and Council, when appointing members to the Tree Board, shall give consideration to those persons who have demonstrated an interest in the preservation and conservation of trees in the City. 
(B)  Categories of Representation. Appointments shall be made so that the seven members of the Tree Board consist of representatives from each of the following groups: 
(1)  A public utility providing service within the City; 
(2)  An educator employed by Columbus State University, the Muscogee County School District, or Columbus Technical College whose principal field of activity is science and/or the environment; 
(3)  The Director or a Commissioner of Keep Columbus Beautiful; 
(4)  A representative of the development or building community of the City working primarily in commercial or industrial development; 
(5)  A representative of the development or building community of the City working primarily in residential development; 
(6)  A representative of an environmental advocacy group headquartered in the City; and 
(7)  A representative who is a landscape or forestry professional. 
(C)  Additional Members. The additional four members shall be appointed from the public at large. 
(D)  City Arborist. The City Arborist shall serve as an advisor and as an ex officio member of the board, but shall not have the right to vote as a Board member. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities. The Tree Board shall have the duties and responsibilities provided in this Section. 
1.  Officers, Rules, Proceedings and Quorum. 
(A)  Officers and Proceedings. The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, establish meeting dates and keep minutes of its proceedings. 
(B)  Quorum. A majority of the total members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(C)  Approval of Rules and Regulations. The rules and regulations shall be approved by the City Attorney and a copy shall be provided to the Clerk of Council. 
2.  Tree Master Plan. The Board shall prepare or update annually a written citywide tree master plan that guides the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees on public lands. 
(A)  Planning Considerations. The plan shall consider existing and future utility locations and environmental factors in relation to existing and future tree species on public lands or on private lands, as provided in this Article or other applicable provisions of the Code. 
(B)  Recommendations. The tree master plan shall be recommended to the Mayor and Council. 
(C)  Implementation. Upon acceptance and approval by the Council the plan shall be implemented as the "Tree Master Plan." 
3.  Variances. The Board shall grant appropriate variances and hear appeals from any decision of the City Arborist regarding the enforcement of this Article 6 of Chapter 4 regarding tree preservation and replacement. 
4.  Recommendations. The Board shall make recommendations to the City Arborist and the Mayor and Council. 
5.  Other Duties and Responsibilities. The Board shall act on other matters designated by this Article or this UDO or by the Mayor and Council. 
ARTICLE 3. - BOARD OF HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 

Section 9.3.1. - Purpose and Creation. 
A.  Purpose. In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the City of Columbus is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; and in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and in order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same, the Mayor and Council of Columbus, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
B.  Creation. There is hereby created "Consolidated Government of Columbus Board of Historic and Architectural Review". The Board shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the City of Columbus, and work directly with the Planning Division. 
Section 9.3.2. - Conflict with Other Regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this Article prescribe more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this Article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute prescribe more restrictive standards than are required by this Article, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Section 9.3.3. - Jurisdiction. 
A.  Properties and Structures within the Board's Jurisdiction. 
1.  Properties Included. The jurisdiction of the Board of Historic and Architectural Review shall include all the following properties: 
(A)  Properties zoned HIST and or designated as a landmark site (L) in or by these land development regulations or on the Official Zoning Map; and 
(B)  Historic properties and districts designated by the Council. 
2.  General Duties. The Board shall oversee those elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, facade easement, and preservation that affects visual quality of any designated historic properties. 
3.  Exemption. The Board shall not consider interior arrangements of structures. 
B.  Powers and Duties. The Board of Historic and Architectural Review shall be authorized to take such actions as listed below. 
1.  Designation of Historic Properties. Recommend to the Council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance and or resolution as historic properties or historic districts. 
2.  Certificates of Appropriateness. Review applications for certificate of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
3.  Board Powers to Adopt Rules of Procedure. The Board shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, design guidelines and criteria; and for the time and place of special meetings. The Board shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendment to this Ordinance. The latest edition of Roberts' Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
4.  Sign Permit in a Historic District. The Board of Historic and Architectural Review shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny sign permits in a historic district. 
5.  Revocation of Historic Designation. Recommend to the Council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed. 
6.  Educational Programs. Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within its jurisdiction. 
7.  Investigations. Conduct such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the Council may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
8.  Grants and Funds. Seek out state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds that are received. 
9.  Historic Preservation Activities. Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of City's historic preservation program. 
10.  Employment. Recommend to the City that it employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the programs of the Board. 
11.  Nominations to the National Register. Review and make comments to the state historic preservation office concerning the nomination of properties and structures within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
12.  Designated Historic Properties Or Districts. Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated by the City. 
13.  Potential Historic Designations. Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Columbus having the potential for designation as historic property. 
(Ord. No. 10-34, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Section 9.3.4. - Composition, Appointment and Compensation. 
A.  Qualifications and Composition. 
1.  Qualifications. The Board shall consist of eleven members appointed by the Council. All members shall be residents of the City and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
2.  Composition. Composition of the Board shall include the following voting members: 
(A)  One architect registered in the State of Georgia; 
(B)  One member of the Columbus Homebuilders Association; 
(C)  One member of Historic Columbus Foundation; 
(D)  One member of the Historic District Preservation Society; 
(E)  One member of the Columbus Board of Realtors; 
(F)  One member of Uptown Business Association; 
(G)  One member of the Liberty Cultural Center, Inc.; 
(H)  Two residents of historic districts, including but not limited to Waverly Terrace, Weracoba, High Uptown, the Historic District, and other districts created by the Council; and 
(I)  Two members at-large. 
3.  Terms of Office. All member appointments shall be for three years. Current membership and terms of office shall not be affected by the adoption of these land development regulations. 
4.  Number of Terms. An appointed member who has served two consecutive full terms shall not be eligible to for reappointment until the lapse of 12 months from the end of the second full term. 
5.  Compensation. Members shall not receive compensation for their services. However, the members may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Authorization of expenses shall be made by the Director of Planning. 
Section 9.3.5. - Organization and Structure. 
A.  Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary who shall serve for terms of one year each and who may be reelected. 
B.  Chair. The Chair shall preside over the Board and shall vote only in the event of a tie vote. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair. 
C.  Secretary. The Secretary shall be the Planning Director. 
D.  Quorum and Decisions. A quorum shall consist of six members. All decisions on applications must be made by a majority vote of the Board members present. 
E.  Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held on the second Monday of each month or at the call of the Chair. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09) 
Section 9.3.6. - Recommendation for Historic District and Property Designation. 
A.  Preliminary Research by the Board. 
1.  Survey of Local Historic Resources. The Board shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City. 
2.  Recommendations. The Board shall present to the Council recommendations designation of historic districts and properties. 
B.  Documentation of Proposed Historic Designation. Prior to a recommendation of a designation of a historic district or historic property to the Council, the Board shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of the elements listed below. 
1.  Description. A physical description. 
2.  Statement of Significance. A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and aesthetic significance. 
3.  Map. A map showing: 
(A)  District boundaries and classification of individual structures and properties as historic, nonhistoric, intrusive or similar class; or 
(B)  Boundaries of individual historic properties. 
4.  Justification. A statement justifying proposed district or individual property boundaries. 
5.  Photographs. Representative photographs of the district or individual properties or structures. 
C.  Designation of a Historic District. 
1.  Criteria for Selection. For the purposes of this these land development regulations, a historic district is a geographically definable area that contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, possessing one or more of the characteristics listed below. 
(A)  State or National Register. The proposed district contains structures, properties, and similar items that are listed on the Georgia Register or National Register of Historic Places. 
(B)  Character or Interest. The proposed district contains structures, properties, and similar items that have a special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest. 
(C)  Architectural Styles. The proposed district contains structures, properties, and similar items that represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(D)  Visual Perception. The proposed district contains structures, properties, and similar items that cause such area, by reason of such factors as listed in this Subsection, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality. 
2.  Boundaries. Boundaries of a proposed historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
3.  Evaluation and Classification of Properties. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as one or more of the following: 
(A)  Historic, meaning the property contributes to the district; 
(B)  Nonhistoric, meaning the property does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in Section 9.3.6 C 1. 
(C)  Intrusive, meaning the property detracts from the district as provided for in Section 9.3.6.C.1. 
D.  Designation of a Historic Property. 
1.  Criteria for Selection. For the purposes of this these land development regulations, a historic property is a building, structure, site or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the Consolidated Government of Columbus, or the State of Georgia, for one of the reasons listed below. 
(A)  State or National Register. The proposed district contains structures, properties, and similar items that are listed on the Georgia Register or National Register of Historic Places. 
(B)  Representative Structure. It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
(C)  Remaining Example. It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style. 
(D)  Significance. It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City, the State of Georgia or the region. 
(E)  Contribution. It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the City, the State of Georgia or the region. 
Section 9.3.7. - Designation of Historic Districts and Historic Properties. 
A.  Designation by Ordinance. Historic districts or historic properties shall be designated by ordinance approved by the Council. 
B.  Applications for Designation. 
1.  Historic District. An application for designation of a historic district may be submitted by the Council, the Board, historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners. 
2.  Historic Property. An application for designation of a historic property may be submitted by the Council, the Board, historical society, neighborhood association or a property owner. 
C.  Designating Ordinance. An ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall contain the components listed below. 
1.  Property Identification. List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property. 
2.  Owner Identification. Identify the name of the owner of the designated property or properties. 
3.  Certificate of Appropriateness. Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the Board prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property. 
4.  Official Zoning Map. Require that property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Map as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
D.  Public Hearings and Notice Required. Both the Board and the Council shall hold a public hearing for a proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. 
1.  Publishing of Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation. 
2.  Written Notice. The Board shall mail written notice of the hearing to all owners and occupants of properties to be designated as a historic property or as part of a historic district. 
3.  Time of Notices. All notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
E.  Recommendation for Designation. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the Board within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Council. 
F.  Action by the Council. Following receipt of the Board's recommendation, the Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
G.  Notification of Designation. 
1.  Owners and Occupants. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be provided written notice of such designation. The notice shall inform the owner or occupant of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the designated historic property or within the designated historic district. 
2.  Other Agencies. The Planning Division shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of the ordinance for designation. 
H.  Notice to State of Georgia. At least 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the Board must submit the report, required in subsection Section 9.3.6.B, to the Historic Preservation Division. 
I.  Pending Designation. If an ordinance for designation of a historic property or historic district is being considered, the Board shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
Section 9.3.8. - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
Approval by the Board of a certificate of appropriateness is required prior to a material change in appearance of a historic property or of a historic district, as provided in this Section. 
A.  Certificate Required. 
1.  Certificate Required. After the designation of a historic property or of a historic district, a material change in appearance shall not be made without a certificate of appropriateness. 
2.  Applicability. The requirement for a certificate of appropriateness prior to a material change in appearance shall apply to the following: 
(A)  The owner or occupant of a historic property of a historic property [district]; or 
(B)  The owner or occupant of a historic or non-historic building, structure, site, or work of art within a historic district. 
B.  Material Changes in Appearance. All material changes in appearance, including installation and removal, are regulated and must comply with the requirements for a certificate of appropriateness. The following is a list of common, but not all inclusive, installations and removals work items: 
1.  Installation or removal of all decks, patios, driveways, and walks; 
2.  Installation or removal of metal awnings or metal canopies; 
3.  Installation of an exterior door or door frame, or the infill of an existing exterior door opening; 
4.  Installation or removal of any exterior wall, including the enclosure of any porch or other outdoor area; 
5.  Installation or relocation of wood, chain link, masonry (garden walls) or wrought iron fencing, or the removal of masonry (garden walls), wood, or wrought iron fencing. 
6.  Installation or removal of all fire escapes, exterior stairs or ramps for the handicap; 
7.  Installation or removal of railing or other wood, wrought iron or masonry detailing; 
8.  Installation of new roofing materials, or removal of existing roofing materials; 
9.  Installation or removal of security grilles; 
10.  Installation of new exterior siding materials, or removal of existing exterior siding materials; 
11.  Installation or removal of exterior skylights; 
12.  Installation of exterior screen windows or exterior screen doors and storm windows or storm doors; 
13.  Installation of an exterior window or window frame or window shutters or the infill of an existing exterior window opening. 
C.  New Structures. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Board prior to erecting a new building or parking lot located on a historic property or within a historic district. 
D.  Demolition or Relocation. 
1.  Certificate Required. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Board prior to demolition or relocation of a building, structure, or work of art located on a historic property or within a historic district. 
2.  Approval or Rejection of Demolition Request. For an application for demolition of an historic property or a structure, site or artwork within a historic district is received, the Board shall have a total of 90 days to either approve or reject an application. The 90 day period to start with the day the application is submitted for demolition with the Inspection and Code Division. 
E.  Workmanship. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Board prior to abrasive cleaning or sandblasting of exterior walls. 
F.  Exemption. In its review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Board shall not consider an interior arrangement or a use that has no effect on exterior architectural features. 
G.  Certificate of Appropriateness Not Required. Ordinary maintenance or repair, including paint, of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property, to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Section 9.3.9. - Review of Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness. 
A.  Board Action. The Board may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate with any modifications it deems necessary, or deny the certificate. 
B.  Conditions for Approval. 
1.  Issuance of a Certificate and Criteria for Consideration. 
(A)  The Board shall approve an application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(B)  In making a determination, the Board shall consider in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria of Sections 9.3.6.C and 9.3.6.D. 
2.  Visual Compatibility. When a historic property is involved, new construction, and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are constructed, moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed in color shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which they are visually related. Material changes must be compatible in terms of the following: 
(A)  Height; 
(B)  Proportion of building's facades; 
(C)  Proportion of openings within the facility; 
(D)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades; 
(E)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets; 
(F)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection; 
(G)  Relationship of materials, texture and color; 
(H)  Roof shape; 
(I)  Walls of continuity; 
(J)  Scale of a building; and 
(K)  Directional expression of front elevation. 
C.  Reconstruction, Alteration, New Construction or Renovation. The Board shall issue certificates of appropriateness for reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setbacks and landscaping as further specified in the Design Guidelines for Columbus and the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitation Historic Buildings. 
D.  Relocation. A decision by the Board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by the standards listed below. 
1.  Contribution to Present Setting. The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Plans for Vacation of an Area. Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Potential for Significant Damage. Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Relocation Area. Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
E.  Demolition. A decision by the Board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by the standards listed below. 
1.  Significance. The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
2.  Contribution to District. The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  Reproduction. The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Status. Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the county. 
5.  Reuse of Property. Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Remedial Measures. Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse. 
F.  Variations and Undue Hardship. 
1.  Variations from Standards. 
(A)  Variations Authorized. Due to unusual circumstances, if the strict application of any provision of this Section or any standards adopted by the Board would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property or structure, the Board may grant a variation from such standards. 
(B)  Standards for Variations. If a variation, modification or interpretation is considered, the Board shall utilize the standards listed below in reaching a decision: 
(1)  The property or shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section; 
(2)  The architectural integrity or character of the property or structure shall be conserved; and 
(3)  Substantial justice done. 
(C)  Stipulations and Conditions. In granting a variation, the Board may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this Section. 
(D)  Exclusion from Undue Hardship. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
2.  Exemptions. 
(A)  Maintenance and Repair Allowed. The requirements of this Section shall not be construed so as to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property or building, provided such activity that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof. 
(B)  Permitted Use of Property. The requirements of this Section shall not be construed to prevent a property owner from making such use of the property that is not prohibited by these land development regulations or other applicable statues, ordinances or regulations. 
Section 9.3.10. - Review Procedures. 
The procedures listed below shall apply to all applications for a certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  Public Notice. 
1.  Public Notice. Prior to reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Board shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. 
2.  Public Hearing. In cases where the Board deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
B.  Action on Applications. 
1.  Period for Decisions. The Board shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the application is submitted. 
2.  Failure to Act. Failure of the Board to act within the 45 day period shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
3.  Proper Documentation Required. The 45-day time period shall not begin until the proper documentation has been submitted to the Board and the Secretary of the Board has signed the application. Proper documentation shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(A)  Drawings; 
(B)  Plans; 
(C)  Pictures of the proposed alterations and materials as specified in the application; and 
(D)  For new construction only, a building elevation of the adjoining properties with a minimum of 100 feet in distance. 
C.  Evidence of Approval. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Board shall demonstrate evidence of approval. 
D.  Monitoring. Two members of the Board shall be assigned by the Chair to monitor the progress of each project when the Board approves an application. 
Section 9.3.11. - Posting of Certificates. 
Certificates of appropriateness approved by the Board must be posted in a conspicuous place on the project site until all project work has been completed and approved by the Inspections and Codes Division. 
Section 9.3.12. - Rejection or Denial of an Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A.  Rejection or Denial. In the event the Board rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a written record of such actions and reasons to the applicant. 
1.  Modifications to Application. The Board may suggest modifications or alternative courses of action upon denial of an application. 
2.  Resubmission of Application. The applicant may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time. 
B.  Building Permits not to be Issued. If an application for a certificate of appropriateness is rejected and includes a material change in the appearance of a structure that would require the issuance of a building permit, the building permit shall not be issued. 
Section 9.3.13. - Signage. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Section is to ensure the appearance, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials, color, and design of such signs is in keeping with the collective characteristics of the structure located within the appropriate historic district or landmark properties. 
B.  Signage Restricted. Signs within a historic zoning district shall be allowed subject to the requirements of Chapter 4 and subject to the additional requirements of this Section. If a conflict occurs between the standards of Chapter 4 and this Article, the more restrictive standard shall prevail. 
C.  Prohibited Signs. The signs listed below are prohibited within a historic zoning district. 
1.  Sign Extensions. Signs shall not extend above the top of the nearest facade, eaves, or firewall of a building or structure. 
2.  Moving Signs. Signs that flash, blink, revolve, or are put in motion by the atmosphere or wind are prohibited. 
3.  Backlit Signs. Backlit signs are prohibited. 
4.  Portable Signs and Banners. 
(A)  Prohibited. Portable signs and banners are prohibited. 
(B)  Exemption. Portable signs and banners may be displayed in association with a special event. The signs or banners shall not be displayed for more than ten days prior to the event and shall be removed immediately following the event. 
5.  Other Prohibited Elements. Visible bulbs, neon tubing, luminous paints, or plastics shall not be permitted as a part of any sign. 
6.  Prohibited Locations. Signs shall not be attached directly to a building so that they obscure, cover or disfigure architectural features or details. Signs shall not obscure the view to or from a historic site or building. 
D.  Permitted Signs. The signs listed below are permitted within a historic zoning district. 
1.  Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall be limited to one sign for each street frontage per premises and shall not be over five feet in height. 
2.  Historic Residential Uses. An additional freestanding sign associated with a historic residential use may be installed, provided the maximum sign area shall be two square feet. 
3.  Historic Commercial Uses. Signs associated with a historic commercial use, provide the maximum sign area shall be 12 square feet. 
4.  Paper Signs. Paper signs attached to windows are discouraged and under no circumstances are to be allowed for a period greater than 15 days. Paper signs shall be displayed not more than three times per year in the same property. 
5.  Permitted Locations. Signs shall be integrated architecturally with the building, or on an awning in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 4. 
E.  General Provisions. 
1.  Illumination. Buildings and signs within the historic zone may be illuminated by remote light sources, provided that these light sources are shielded to protect adjacent properties. 
2.  Real Estate Signs. Additional freestanding signs that are allowed in Chapter 4 while a property is available for sale or lease shall be removed not more than ten days after the closing of a sale or execution of a lease for a house, property or lot. 
3.  Compatibility. New signs shall be compatible with the principal and accessory structures on a site and with surrounding buildings and sites. For the purposes of this Section, compatibility includes size, shape, design, materials, and overall appearance, method of attachment, erection and location. 
Section 9.3.14. - Certificate of Appropriateness to be Voided. 
The life or validity of a certificate shall run concurrently with a building permit issued for the project. The certificate will become void unless construction is commenced within six months following the date of issuance. Should a building permit not be issued, the certificate of appropriateness shall become void within six months of date of issuance. 
Section 9.3.15. - Appeal Process. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Board of Historic and Architectural Review relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
A.  Filing of Appeal. Any appeal must be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within 15 days after a determination made in accordance with this Article. If the Board of Historic and Architectural Review fails to act on an application, an appeal from such determination must be made within 15 days following expiration of the 45 day period allowed the Board to make a decision. 
B.  Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the Board of Historic and Architectural Review. The action by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be made only if a majority of the members find that the Board of Historic and Architectural Review abused its discretion in reaching a decision. Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be reviewed in the Superior Court as provided by law and these land development regulations. 
Section 9.3.16. - Maintenance of Historic Property. 
A.  Failure to Maintain or Repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The Board shall be charged with the responsibilities listed below regarding demolition by neglect. 
1.  Monitoring. The Board, along with the Planning Division and Inspections and Code Division, shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
2.  Determination of Failure to Maintain or Repair. If Board determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, it shall request the Inspections and Code Division to notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps needed to remedy code violations or failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair. The owner of such property shall have 90 days to remedy all instances of deterioration or neglect that have been identified by the Division. 
3.  Enforcement. Enforcement of any failure to maintain and repair a historic structure shall occur as provided in Chapter 12 of these land development regulations. 
Chapter 10 - Development Review Procedures and Permits 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE, OVERVIEW AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 10.1.1. - Purpose of Chapter 10. 
This Chapter describes the process through which a zoning change may be approved on a property; the approval process for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects; the procedures for amendments to the text of this UDO; the process for appeals from an administrative decision, the process through which a special exception or for hardships may be approved. 
Section 10.1.2. - Overview—Land Development Permitting. 
The following presents a summary of the plans and procedures involved in the land development approval and permitting process. 
A.  Zoning Changes. An application for a zoning change shall include the information listed below. 
1.  Legal Description. An application for a zoning change shall include a legal description of the area to be rezoned. 
2.  Concept Plan. An application for rezoning or approval of a special exception use must include a concept plan showing the proposed use of the property. 
B.  "Major Subdivisions"—Subdivisions with Public Improvements. The division of land into two or more lots that will require the construction or extension of public streets, water or sanitary sewerage, other than the direct connection of buildings to existing facilities, or the provision of stormwater drainage facilities (other than driveway culverts), shall be conducted as indicated below. 
1.  Project Concept Approval. Project concept approval is granted by the Planning Department upon review and approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat. 
2.  Development Permit. A Development Permit is issued by the Engineering Department based on review and approval of civil drawings for construction of the subdivision. 
3.  Prerequisite for Final Plat. Receipt by the Engineering Department and Columbus Water Works of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to allow filing of a final plat. 
4.  Final Subdivision Plat Approval. Approval of a final subdivision plat by the Planning Division and approval of public improvements by the applicable department will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
5.  Sale of Lots and Issuance of Building Permits. After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
C.  Minor Subdivisions. The following types of subdivisions fall under the category of and shall be defined as "minor subdivisions." 
1.  Existing Services and Access. The division of land into 2 or more lots, in which each lot has adequate frontage on an existing street or road, and the subdivision does not require the construction of a new street or the widening of an existing roadway, the provision of stormwater drainage facilities other than driveway culverts, or the construction or improvement of any public utilities. 
2.  Recombination. The sale or exchange of portions of adjoining lots between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, including the recombination of existing lots of record. 
(A)  Additional Lots Prohibited. A recombination of lots shall not create additional lots. 
(B)  Compliance with Zoning District. All resulting lots from a recombination shall be in accordance with the provisions of the zoning district applicable to the lots, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
3.  Nondevelopment Land Sales. 
(A)  Description. A nondevelopment land sales plat is for the sale of a parcel or tract of land for which no new streets or roads are created or no new utility improvements are required or no new sanitary sewer or approval of a septic tank is required. 
(B)  Certification Required. Any plat for such sale that is filed for recordation by the Clerk of the Superior Court must contain a certification signed and sealed by a licensed surveyor that the plat is consistent with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d), and the plat shall be clearly captioned as follows: "The tract or tracts depicted on this plat are not eligible for connection to a sanitary sewer system or for septic tank approval." 
4.  Process for Review of Minor Subdivisions. The approval of a minor subdivision shall be conducted as provided herein. 
(A)  Effect of Approval. Approval of a final subdivision plat by the Planning Director will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(B)  Effect of Recordation. After recordation of the final plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
D.  Multifamily and Nonresidential Projects. Multifamily and nonresidential projects shall be reviewed as provided herein. 
1.  Project Concept Approval. Project concept approval is granted by the Planning Department upon review and approval of a site plan for the project. 
2.  Development Permit. A development permit is issued by the Engineering Department based on review and approval of civil drawings for construction of the project. 
3.  Building Permit. A building permit is issued by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement based on review and approval of architectural plans. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshall shall be approved by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement prior to issuance of the building permit. 
4.  Receipt of Surveys. Receipt by the Department of Engineering and the Columbus Water Works of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of all public improvements is required in order to authorize permanent water and sanitary sewer service. 
5.  Permanent Electric Power and Occupancy. Permanent electric power and occupancy of the building is authorized by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING CHANGES 

Section 10.2.1. - Official Zoning Map Amendments. 
The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time, overlay districts may be approved and special exception uses may be approved for specific properties by the City Council under the procedures in this Section. In addition, changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning, overlay district or special exception use approval may also be approved by the City Council following the procedures in this Section. All of these types of actions shall be referred to as "zoning changes." 
Section 10.2.2. - Initiation of Zoning Changes. 
A.  Initiation of Changes. An application for a zoning change for any property or properties in the city may be initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Advisory Commission, by the owner of the property or appointed representative, or by the Director of Planning. Unless initiated by the City Council, the Planning Department or the Planning Advisory Commission, all such applications shall be initiated by the owner of a majority interest in the property affected. 
B.  Submission of Applications. All applications shall be submitted to the Planning Division on the Division's application forms. 
1.  Fees. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the City Council. A fee shall not be charged if the City Council, the Planning Department or the Planning Advisory Commission has initiated the application. 
2.  Legal Boundary Description. All applications shall be accompanied by a legal boundary description of the property. 
C.  Completeness Review. The Planning Division shall review the application for completeness within five days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. 
D.  Notification. The Planning Division shall notify the Council in writing that a request has been received. Notification shall include the name and address of the applicant, the location of the property, and the nature of the request. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.2.3. - Waiting Period for Reapplication. 
A.  Reapplication for Same Zoning District or Use. If a petition for a zoning change is defeated by the City Council, a new petition for a zoning change on all or any portion of the property described in the defeated ordinance for the same zone classification or special exception use shall not be heard until the lapse of one year from the date the ordinance was defeated. 
B.  Reapplication for Different Zoning District or Use. If a petition for a zoning change is defeated by the City Council, a new petition for a zoning change on all or any portion of the property described in the defeated ordinance for a different zone classification or special exception use shall not be heard until the lapse of six months from the date the ordinance was defeated. 
C.  Reapplication after Approval of Petition. If a petition for a zoning change is approved by the City Council, a new petition for a zoning change on all or any portion of the property described in the approved ordinance for a different zone classification or special exception use shall not be heard until the lapse of six months from the date the ordinance was approved. 
D.  Reduction of Waiting Period. The City Council may approve a reduction in the waiting period as provided below. 
1.  Reduction to Six Months. For a case that was previously defeated, the City Council may reduce the waiting period to no less than six months from the date of denial upon a determination that new or extenuating circumstances justify such a reduction. 
2.  Waiver of Entire Period. For a case that was previously approved or withdrawn, the City Council may waive the waiting period entirely upon a determination that new or extenuating circumstances justify such a waiver. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 10.2.4. - Concept Plan. 
A.  Concept Plan Required. An application for a rezoning or special exception use approval shall be accompanied by a concept plan in the number required by the City. 
B.  Preparation. The applicant, a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person familiar with land development activities may prepare a concept plan. 
C.  Use of Boundary Survey or Property Map. The concept plan shall be drawn to scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract based on the legal description of the property. 
D.  Contents. The concept plan shall show, as appropriate to the zoning or special exception use requested, the information indicated below. 
1.  Vehicular Access and Use Areas. Location of existing roads and driveways, including widths, location of existing parking areas, and other such details as may be pertinent to the review and recommendation of the petition. 
2.  Property Owner. Name and address of the property owner. 
3.  Applicant. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
4.  Survey. Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
5.  Use. Proposed use of the property. 
6.  Location. Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres or in square feet if less than an acre. 
7.  Location Sketch. Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets and railroads. 
(A)  Scale and Preparation. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. 
(B)  USGS Maps. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
8.  Zoning District. Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
9.  Man-made Features. Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
10.  Project Layout. The proposed project layout including the information listed below. 
(A)  Subdivisions. For subdivisions, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
(B)  Multifamily and Nonresidential Projects. For multifamily and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, solid waste disposal facilities, buffers, curb cuts, parking areas and driveways. 
11.  Water Supply. A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
12.  Sanitary Sewer. A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
13.  Stormwater Detention. The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
14.  Additional Information. Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
Section 10.2.5. - Process for Zoning Changes. 
Before the Council may take final action on a proposed zoning change, the Planning Advisory Commission shall consider the proposal and the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
A.  Public Notice - Prior to Planning Advisory Commission. 
1.  Notification to the General Public. 
(A)  Posting of Property. A zoning change initiated by a party other than the City Council, the Planning Department, or the Planning Advisory Commission shall be heard at a public hearing only upon completion of posting of the property as provided herein. 
(1)  At the time a petition for a zoning change is filed with the Planning Department, the petitioner shall post a sign or signs of wood or metal, at least 48 vertical inches by 72 horizontal inches in size, and with lettering of at least 3 inches in height in black letters on a white background, except that the existing and the proposed zoning districts shall be in red letters. 
(a)  The sign shall list the name of the applicant, applicant's telephone number, address of property, present zoning, proposed zoning, proposed use of the property and the telephone number of the Planning Department. 
(b)  A sign shall be placed within one foot of the public right- of-way along street frontage of the property at 500-foot intervals for which the zoning change has been requested. 
(c)  If the property has 500 feet or less frontage, only one sign is required. 
(d)  If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed within one foot of the right-of-way of the street or road at each location from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  The petitioner shall notify the Planning Department in writing that the signs have been erected and where they are located. The petitioner shall submit photos of said sign or signs. 
(3)  The signs shall remain posted until final action has been taken by the Council or the application has been withdrawn. 
(4)  The petitioner shall remove all "notice to rezone" signs within ten days after final action by Council. 
2.  Mail Notice to Surrounding Property Owners. If the proposed zoning change was initiated by a party other than the City Council, the Planning Department or the Planning Advisory Commission, mail notice shall also be given to surrounding property owners as indicated below. 
(A)  At least seven days prior to the Planning Advisory Commission meeting, the Planning Department shall mail a notice to all persons owning property located within 300 feet of the proposed property that is the subject matter of the zoning change. However, at the discretion of the Planning Director, notice shall be mailed to property owners beyond the 300 feet notification requirement. If the applicant is also the owner of the property adjacent to the proposed property to be rezoned, notice shall be mailed to property owners within 300 feet beyond the applicant-owned adjacent property, or farther if the Planning Director deems appropriate. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
(B)  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the Planning Advisory Commission meeting. 
B.  Planning Advisory Commission Meeting. The meeting for zoning changes held by the Planning Advisory Commission shall be held within 21 days of receipt of a complete application for a minor zoning change, and within 45 days of receipt of a complete application for a major zoning change. The meeting shall be conducted in the manner indicated below. 
1.  Convening of Meeting. The meeting shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the Chairperson, the Vice-chairperson or the Planning Advisory Commission's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official. 
2.  Presentation of Proposed Zoning Changes. The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the Planning Advisory Commission. 
3.  Public Presentations. No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. 
(A)  Identification of Speakers. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state their name and home address. 
(B)  Limits on Presentations. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning change. 
(C)  Minimum Time for Discussion. Not less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of a zoning change and not less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. 
(D)  Additional Presentations. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
4.  Order of Presentation. The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the meeting. 
5.  Questions by Planning Advisory Commission. During the meeting, the Planning Advisory Commission members may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
6.  Action on Zoning Changes. Following the presentation on each zoning change, the Planning Advisory Commission at that time shall make its recommendation or take such other action as may be appropriate. 
(A)  Approval of Motions. A motion to recommend approval or denial of an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting in order for the motion to be approved. 
(B)  Failure of Motion to Approve. If a motion to recommend approval of an application fails, the application is automatically recommended for denial. If a motion to recommend denial of an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(C)  Effect of Tie Vote. A tie vote on any motion shall be deemed to be no action, and shall automatically be tabled until the next scheduled meeting of the Planning Advisory Commission. Should a tie vote result at the next scheduled meeting, the application will then go forward to the Council with no recommendation. 
(D)  Failure to Take Action. If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the Council with no recommendation. 
C.  Planning Department Review. 
1.  Report for Zoning Change Approval . A Planning Department staff report with a recommendation of approval or conditional approval for a zoning change shall be delivered to the Clerk of Council's Office. At such time, Planning Department will advertise the date, time, and place for the public hearing in accordance with Section 10.2.5.C.4(A). 
2.  Report for Zoning Change Denial . A Planning Department staff report with a recommendation of denial for a zoning change shall be delivered to the Clerk of Council's Office. The applicant for the change shall appeal the recommendation to the City Council. 
3.  Notification for Affected Councilors . The Planning Department shall notify a City Councilor of a proposed rezoning case in his/her council district. Said notification shall take place upon submittal of the staff report(s) to the Clerk of Council. At-large Councilors shall be notified of all proposed rezoning cases upon submittal of the staff report(s) to the Clerk of Council. 
(A)  Time Period for Appeal . An appeal shall be made within two weeks after the Clerk of Council receives the recommendation of the Planning Department. 
(B)  Effect of Appeal . If the applicant appeals, the Clerk of Council will notify the Planning Department. At such time, Planning Department will advertise the date, time, and place for the public hearing in accordance with Section 10.2.5.C.4(A). If no appeal is made, the Council shall consider the petition withdrawn by the applicant. 
4.  Public Notice - Prior to Council public hearing . 
(A)  Notification to the General Public . 
(1)  Newspaper Advertisement . 
(a)  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The Planning Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  The published notice shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property or the special exception use requested. 
(2)  Mail Notice to Surrounding Property Owners . If the proposed zoning change was initiated by a party other than the City Council, the Planning Department or the Planning Advisory Commission, mail notice shall also be given to surrounding property owners as indicated below. 
(a)  At least seven days prior to the City Council meeting, the Planning Department shall mail a notice to all persons owning property located within 300 feet of the proposed property that is the subject matter of the zoning change. However, at the discretion of the Planning Director, notice shall be mailed to property owners beyond the 300 feet notification requirement. If the applicant is also the owner of the property adjacent to the proposed property to be rezoned, notice shall be mailed to property owners within 300 feet beyond the applicant-owned adjacent property, or farther if the Planning Director deems appropriate. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the City Council meeting. 
D.  City Council Public Hearing. 
1.  Scheduling of First Reading. At the hearing when the proposed zoning change is scheduled to be considered, a first reading of the ordinance will be held. The City Attorney will conduct the public hearing and act as the Presiding Official. 
2.  Call for Proposed Zoning Changes. The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the City Council. 
(A)  Presentation of Recommendation. As each application for a zoning change is called for consideration, the Presiding Official shall read the recommendation of the Planning Division and shall present such other documentation, as deemed pertinent. 
(B)  Public Presentation. No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. 
(C)  Identification. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state their name and home address. 
(D)  Limits of Presentations. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning change. 
(E)  Minimum Limit for Presentations. Not less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of a zoning change and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. 
(F)  Additional Presentations. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
3.  Order of Presentations. The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Proponents of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
4.  Questions by Council Members. During the public hearing, the City Council members may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
5.  Continuances. The City Council may provide a continuance of the application to a subsequent meeting. 
6.  Vote on Applications. There shall be an interval of at least one week between the public hearing and the City Council vote on the application. When the ordinance is called, action shall be taken by vote of the City Council as provided herein. 
(A)  Approval of Motions. A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting in order for the motion to be approved. 
(B)  Effect of Failure to Approve. If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(C)  Effect of a Tie Vote. A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(D)  Effect of No Action. If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the City Council. 
7.  City Council Action. In taking action on an application, the City Council may: 
(A)  Approve the proposal or approve it with conditions, in whole or in part; or 
(B)  Approve a zoning district other than that proposed by the applicant on all or any portion of the property; or 
(C)  Deny the proposal; or 
(D)  Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant; or 
(E)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
(F)  Refer the application back to the Planning Advisory Commission for further consideration. 
E.  Referral to Planning Advisory Commission for Further Consideration. If the City Council refers the application back to the Planning Advisory Commission for further study, the following actions shall occur. 
1.  Public Notice. The Planning Division shall give public notice of the Planning Advisory Commission's meeting for further consideration in the same manner as described in Section 10.2.5.A, and the Planning Advisory Commission shall conduct its additional meeting and take action as described in Section 10.2.5.B. 
2.  City Council Action. After the Planning Advisory Commission's further consideration and recommendation on the referred application, the City Council shall follow the same procedure set forth in Section 10.2.5.C. and Section 10.2.5.D. to consider the application. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09; Ord. No. 12-53, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 14-2, § 4, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Section 10.2.6. - Staff Analysis of Zoning Changes. 
A.  Major and Minor Zoning Changes. 
1.  Major Zoning Change. A major zoning change is an application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, approval of a special exception use or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special exception use, which if approved would result in any of the following: 
(A)  A use that would be inconsistent with the Columbus Comprehensive Plan; 
(B)  A project that would be inconsistent with any element of the Columbus-Phenix City Transportation Plan; 
(C)  A project that would have at least one entrance on a major thoroughfare; 
(D)  A project that is a Development of Regional Impact as provided in Section 10.2.9.; or 
(E)  A project that would include any of the following uses: 
(1)  More than 100 dwelling units; 
(2)  More than 100 hotel rooms; 
(3)  More than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in office use; 
(4)  More than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area in commercial sales or services use; or 
(5)  More than 150,000 square feet of gross floor area in warehouse, wholesale or industrial use. 
2.  Minor Zoning Change. A Minor Zoning Change is an application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, approval of a special exception use or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special exception use, which is not a major zoning change. 
3.  Determination of Major or Minor Zoning Change. The Director of Planning shall have sole discretionary authority to determine whether an application is a major or minor zoning change. 
B.  Staff Report on Zoning Changes. 
1.  Preliminary Findings. Such preliminary findings that the Planning Division may publish prior to the Planning Advisory Committee meeting regarding a petition for a zoning change shall be made available to the Planning Advisory Committee, the petitioner and the general public at the same time. Such preliminary findings shall be made available in whatever manner the Planning Division considers most efficient and expeditious. 
2.  Advisory Report and Recommendations. The Planning Division shall have 30 days from the petition submittal deadline date to submit its advisory report and recommendations to the City Council on minor zoning changes, and 60 days on major zoning changes. 
3.  Contents of Report. The Planning Division report shall include, but must not be limited to, the factors listed below as appropriate and applicable to the zoning change proposed and which are relevant standards to balance the public interest of promoting the health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. 
(A)  General Planning and Land Use. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  Is the proposal consistent with or contrary to the land use and other adopted plans of the consolidated government, and does the change meet, or not meet, adopted land use policies, and what is the relation of the changes to each applicable policy? 
(2)  To what extent is the request consistent with existing or future land use patterns? 
(3)  To what extent would the request affect development of existing undeveloped or under-developed parcels in the area? 
(4)  What is the suitability of the property for the present and proposed zoned uses? 
(5)  At what rate is such land being developed for the proposed use or other uses in the vicinity? 
(6)  Is the development reasonably compact and contiguous to an existing developed area, or will the result encourage leapfrog or sprawl development? 
(7)  Is it possible to find adequate sites for the proposed use in zoning districts permitting such use in reasonable proximity to the area to be served by type proposed use? 
(8)  Is the development consistent with the requirements of the unified development ordinance in terms of building setbacks and lot size? 
(9)  Has the property previously been developed contrary to existing regulations? 
(B)  Environmental Impacts. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  Is the property in a floodplain? 
(2)  Does the proposed development come under the regulations of the floodplain development regulations? 
(3)  Does the proposed development come under the regulations of the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations? 
(4)  How would the proposed zoning change impact on problem areas identified by the Columbus stormwater management program? 
(5)  Would the proposed zoning change result in a noise problem not usually associated with the current zoning classification? 
(6)  Would the proposed zoning change result in a development that would have detrimental visual effects on surrounding property? 
(C)  City Services. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  Police. Can the proposed development be easily patrolled from an existing patrol zone? 
(2)  Police. Does the development or use pose any unique police protection problems? 
(3)  Fire. Does the proposed development or use pose any unique fire protection problems? 
(4)  Water. What is the adequacy and availability of public water? 
(5)  Sewer. What is the adequacy and availability of sanitary sewers? 
(6)  Parks and Recreation. Are the public recreational facilities capable of absorbing a change in demand that may result from the rezoning? 
(7)  Parks and Recreation. Are any of the planned city parks included in the area under construction? 
(8)  Schools. Is the Muscogee County School District capable of absorbing a change in demand that may result from a rezoning? 
(9)  Transportation. Is the road system that will serve the tract being rezoned capable of absorbing the increased traffic? 
(10)  Parking and Curb Cuts. Is the proposed development consistent with the requirements of this UDO in terms of off-street parking and curb cuts? 
(D)  Zoning Review. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  What is the zoning of the nearby property? 
(2)  Is this spot zoning? That is, singling out a small parcel of land for a use totally different from that of the surrounding area, for the benefit of the owner of such property and to the detriment of other owners? 
(3)  Would this be spot zoning done to implement the general land use plan? 
(4)  Are present zoning boundaries illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions, and is this proposed change the most suitable permanent zoning boundary? 
(5)  Will the change in zoning encourage more requests for zoning changes in the area? 
(6)  What is the amount of land currently zoned for the proposed use in the vicinity, and does additional land need to be zoned for the proposed use? Are there any special circumstances that make land zoned for the proposed use unavailable for development? 
(E)  Reasonableness of Request. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  What is the basis of this request, and are there substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accord with the existing zoning? 
(2)  Is the proposed use out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the city? 
(3)  What will the relative gain to the public as compared to any hardship imposed upon individual property owners? 
(F)  Change to Conditions in the Area. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  What is the extent to which property values of the property being rezoned are diminished by the current zoning restrictions and how does this promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public? 
(2)  To what extent would the property values of the adjacent properties be affected by the rezoning? 
(3)  Have the basic land use conditions in the area been changed? 
(4)  Will the change in zoning significantly alter the population density pattern? 
(5)  Will the change in zoning seriously reduce the available light and air in adjacent areas? 
(6)  Will the zoning change act as a deterrent to the improvement of development of adjacent property in accord with existing regulations? 
(G)  Attitude of Property Owners. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  How many property owners were notified of the proposed rezoning, and do they support or object to the change? 
(2)  Will property owners be affected by the zoning change? 
(H)  Planning Advisory Commission Recommendations. The report shall answer the question listed below. 
(1)  What is the recommendation of the PAC? 
(I)  Summary. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  What are the principal issues involved in recommending action on this application? 
(2)  How do these issues relate to the applicable Standards for Zoning Changes? 
(J)  Recommendations. The report shall answer the questions listed below. 
(1)  What is the recommendation of the Planning Director? 
(2)  What are any conditions of approval that might be imposed to mitigate adverse consequences of the zoning change? 
Section 10.2.7. - Standards for Zoning Changes. 
A.  Rezoning Petitions. The Planning Advisory Committee and the City Council shall consider the standards listed below in considering any zoning proposal that would result in a change in the boundary of a zoning district, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal. 
1.  Consistency. Is the proposed use consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning district? 
2.  Suitability. Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
3.  Affect on Existing Uses and Properties. Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
4.  Comprehensive Plan. Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
5.  Use of Current Zoning. Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
6.  Impact of Proposed Zoning or Use. Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
7.  New or Changing Conditions. Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
8.  Public and Private Property Rights. Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
B.  Special Exception Uses. A special exception use otherwise permitted within a zoning district shall be considered to be compatible with other uses permitted in the district, provided that due consideration is given to the objective criteria listed below, as applicable to the specific use proposed. 
1.  Access. Is or will the type of street providing access to the use be adequate to serve the proposed special exception use? 
2.  Traffic and Pedestrian Safety. Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
3.  Adequacy of Public Facilities. Are or will public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to serve the special exception use? 
4.  Protection from Adverse Affects. Are or will refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property be located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor? 
5.  Hours of Operation. Will the hours and manner of operation of the special exception use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
6.  Compatibility. Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size, character or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
C.  Special exception for existing buildings in Neighborhood Commercial Districts. A special exception may be granted for existing buildings located in Neighborhood Commercial zoning districts that were in existence as of March 1, 2005 and that have more than 5,000 square feet under roof, to allow, at any time, one or more permitted uses within such buildings that each occupy more than 5,000 gross square feet. Such buildings may be granted a special exception provided due consideration is given to the objective criteria listed below as applicable to the specific building proposed: 
1.  Access. Is street access to the building adequate to serve one or more permitted uses that each occupy more than 5,000 gross square feet in the building? 
2.  Traffic and Pedestrian Safety. Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles if there are one or more permitted uses that each occupy more than 5,000 gross square feet in the building? 
3.  Adequacy of Public Facilities. Are or will public facilities such as water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to one or more permitted uses that each occupy more than 5,000 gross square feet in the building? 
D.  Change in Conditions of Approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the City Council through action on a zoning change shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this section for a map amendment or special exception use, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 10-37, § 1, 7-27-10) 
Section 10.2.8. - Withdrawal. 
A.  Zoning Change Withdrawal. Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed zoning change may do so by written notarized request for withdrawal delivered to the Planning Director. Alternately, a request for withdrawal may be made by the applicant directly to the City Council at their Zoning Agenda Meeting on the case or at their public hearing. 
B.  Administrative Withdrawal. If a request for withdrawal is received prior to the City Council's Zoning Agenda Meeting, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Planning without restriction on the refiling of a proposed zoning change on the property in the future. 
C.  Withdrawal at the Zoning Agenda Meeting. 
1.  If withdrawal is requested by the applicant at the City Council's Zoning Agenda Meeting, the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial by the City Council. 
2.  If the withdrawal request is approved, the City Council will not consider a new petition for a zoning change on all or any portion of the property described in the original petition until a lapse of six months from the date of withdrawal approval. 
D.  Failure to Appeal Recommendation for Denial. 
1.  When a recommendation for denial of a petition by the Planning Division is not appealed by the applicant prior to or at the Zoning Agenda Meeting of the City Council, the petition shall be deemed withdrawn by the applicant and no further consideration of the petition shall be given by the City Council. 
2.  When a petition for a zoning change has been deemed withdrawn due to the failure of the applicant to appeal a recommendation for denial by the Planning Division, the City Council will not consider a new petition for a zoning change on all or any portion of the property described in the original petition until a lapse of six months from the date of said withdrawal. 
E.  Withdrawal Request Following Call for Ordinance. If the request for withdrawal is made by the applicant after the City Council has called for the ordinance and public hearing, the petition shall remain on the City Council public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial by the City Council. 
1.  If the withdrawal request is denied, then the public hearing on the approval or denial of the petition will proceed. 
2.  When withdrawal of a petition for a zoning change has been approved by the Council at their public hearing on the ordinance, the Council will not consider a new petition for a zoning change for a different zone classification or special exception use until the lapse of six months, or for the same zone classification or special exception use until the lapse of 1 year, from the date the withdrawal was approved. 
Section 10.2.9. - Developments of Regional Impact. 
A.  Thresholds for Developments of Regional Impact. Any application that would result in a zoning change that meets or exceeds any of the thresholds listed below, or as otherwise adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be considered a Development of Regional Impact (DRI). 
1.  Office. New office use greater than 400,000 gross square feet. 
2.  Commercial. New commercial use greater than 300,000 gross square feet. 
3.  Wholesale and Distribution. New wholesale and distribution use greater than 500,000 gross square feet. 
4.  Hospitals and Health Care Facilities. New hospitals and health care facilities greater than 300 new beds or generating more than 375 peak hour vehicle trips per day. 
5.  Housing. New housing greater than 400 new lots or units. 
6.  Industrial. New industrial use greater than 500,000 gross square feet, or employing more than 1,600 people, or covering more than 400 acres. 
7.  Hotels. New hotels greater than 400 rooms. 
8.  Mixed Use. Mixed use with a total gross square footage greater than 400,000 or covering more than 120 acres. 
9.  Airports. Any new airport, new runway or runway extension. 
10.  Attractions and Recreational Facilities. Attractions and Recreational Facilities greater than 1,500 parking spaces or a seating capacity of more than 6,000. 
11.  Post-Secondary Schools. New post-secondary school with capacity of more than 2,400 students or expansion of this type school by at least 25% of capacity. 
12.  Waste Handling Facilities. New waste handling facilities or expansion of use of an existing facility by 50 percent or more and located within ½-mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
13.  Quarries, Asphalt or Cement Plants. New quarries, asphalt or cement plants or facilities or expansion of existing facility by more than 50 percent and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
14.  Wastewater Treatment Facilities. New wastewater treatment facility or expansion of existing facility by more than 50 percent and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
15.  Petroleum Storage Facilities. New petroleum storage facilities with storage greater than 50,000 barrels, if within 1,000 feet of any water supply; otherwise, storage greater than 200,000 barrels; and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
16.  Intermodal Terminals. New intermodal terminals facilities. 
17.  Truck Stops. A new facility with more than 3 diesel fuel pumps, or containing a half-acre of truck parking or 10 truck parking spaces. 
18.  Other Development Types. Any other development types not identified above, including parking facilities of at least 1000 parking spaces. 
B.  Application for DRI Approval. 
1.  Regional Development Center. Any DRI application shall be submitted by the applicant to the Lower Chattahoochee Regional Development Center (RDC) prior to submission of the application to the City. 
2.  Period of Review. Once the RDC has accepted the completed form, and has made an official determination that the project is a DRI, within five calendar days, the 30 day review period officially begins. 
3.  Action by the City Council. The City Council shall not take final action to approve a DRI until either: 
(A)  A report shall have been received from the RDC reflecting its findings and recommendations, if any; or 
(B)  Said report is not received within 30 days of submittal of the application to the RDC. 
Section 10.2.10. - Effect of Zoning District Boundary Change. 
A.  Effect of Approval. If changes are made in district boundaries on the zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map by the planning division after the amendments have been approved by the City Council and signed by the Mayor and in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Effective Date. Approval of zoning change on a property shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by City Council and the ordinance becomes law. 
C.  Nonconformities. For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this UDO prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions of this UDO regarding nonconformities. 
D.  Prior Construction. Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this UDO prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the applicable provisions of this UDO regarding nonconformities. 
ARTICLE 3. - PROJECT APPROVAL 
The Planning Division must first approve a preliminary plat for subdivision activity or a site plan for development of a multifamily or nonresidential project prior to the issuance of a development permit or building permit, as applicable, or initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. 

Section 10.3.1. - Responsibility for Preliminary Plats and Site Plans. 
A.  Administration. The Planning Director is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats and site plans. 
1.  Review by Other Agencies. The Planning Director shall forward a copy of the project approval application to other City departments, the Georgia DOT, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. 
2.  Comments from Other Agencies. The Planning Director shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each Department as necessary to resolve all issues. 
B.  Preparation. A preliminary plat or site plan may be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person professionally familiar with land development and project construction activities. 
Section 10.3.2. - Procedure for Project Approval. 
A.  Optional Pre-Application Procedure. 
1.  Sketch Plan. A subdivider or developer may prepare a sketch plan for review by the Planning Division. The sketch plan should include: 
(A)  A tentative layout of streets; 
(B)  The total acreage of the proposed development and the approximate number of acres to be developed to each use if more than one use is being considered; 
(C)  Proposed sites for schools, parks, and other similar facilities; 
(D)  For subdivisions, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot; 
(E)  For multifamily and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, solid waste disposal facilities, buffers, curb cuts, parking areas and driveways; 
(F)  Any unusual topographical feature, such as a watercourse; 
(G)  And any and all areas located within the special flood hazard area as defined in the Land Development Activities Chapter of this UDO. 
2.  Confidentiality. The sketch plan and all discussion regarding it will be considered as being confidential between the subdivider and the planning division staff. 
3.  Effect of Review. Favorable consideration by the Planning Division shall not be construed as preliminary or tentative plat approval. 
B.  Separate or Joint Application Review. An application for project approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit or building permit, as applicable. 
C.  Project Approval Application. An application for project approval shall be submitted to the Planning Division. The application shall include the information listed below. 
1.  Application Form. A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Planning Division, requesting review for project approval. 
2.  Number of Copies. The required number of copies of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this Article. 
3.  Conservation Subdivisions. For conservation subdivisions, the following information shall be submitted: 
(A)  A conservation resource inventory (see Section 6.4.2); 
(B)  Calculations of usable land and total allowable lots (see Section 6.4.3); and 
(C)  A maintenance of open space and operation of common facilities plan (see Section 6.7.5.B). 
4.  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the City Council. 
D.  Review for Application Completeness. The Planning Division shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
E.  Distribution. The Planning Division shall send a copy of an application to the Department of Engineering, the Inspections and Code Enforcement Division, and the Columbus Water Works for informational purposes. 
F.  Mandatory Georgia Department of Transportation Review. If the proposed subdivision includes or abuts a U.S. or State numbered highway, unless all of the lots in the subdivision contain 5 acres or more and no new street is involved, review by the Georgia DOT is required pursuant to O.C.G.A. ;s 32-6-151. 
1.  Additional Copies. For such a proposed subdivision, two additional copies of the preliminary plat must be submitted to the Planning Division for forwarding to DOT. 
2.  Response to Georgia DOT. The owner or subdivider must respond to the recommendations of the DOT prior to preliminary plat approval. 
3.  Failure to Provide Comments. If the written recommendations of the DOT are not made within 30 days of receipt of the preliminary plat by DOT, their approval shall be assumed as provided under State law. 
G.  Action by the Planning Director. Within 30 days following receipt of the application, the Planning Division shall take action to approve, with or without modifications, or to disapprove the application. If disapproved, the reasons for disapproval will be indicated on the drawing or in writing, along with all comments related to compliance with this UDO. 
H.  Compliance. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
I.  Prohibited Approval. The Planning Division shall not approve any preliminary subdivision plat or site plan whereon is shown a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason. 
J.  Determination of Compliance. When the Planning Division has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this UDO, it shall be approved. 
1.  Approved Drawings. The Planning Director shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan. 
2.  Distribution. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and the Planning Division shall retain copies for its files and distribution to others. 
K.  Effect of Certificate of Project Approval. The certificate of project approval shall remain in effect for a period of one consecutive year, after which time it shall become null and void if no permit has been issued or no development activity has begun. Once null and void, a new certificate shall be required prior to issuance of a permit or authorization to begin development activity. Once a permit has been issued or development activity has begun pursuant to a project approval in effect, project approval shall remain in effect for all portions or phases of the development included within the project approval application. 
Section 10.3.3. - General Standards. 
A.  Proposed Development and Street Name. The proposed name of the development and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development or street in the city. 
1.  Refusal. If shown to the contrary, the Planning Division may refuse to accept such development or street names. 
2.  Use of Letter Designations. The development may use letter designations in place of proposed street names at the option of the applicant. 
B.  Preparation of Preliminary Plat or Site Plan. The preliminary plat or site plan shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
C.  Standards for Preliminary Plat or Site Plan. 
1.  General Standards. The preliminary subdivision plat or site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimension of the sheet size is 36 inches by 48 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches. The Planning Director may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
2.  Properties in Excess of 100 Acres. For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Director of the Planning Department, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.3.4. - Preliminary Plat or Site Plan Requirements. 
The information listed in this Section shall be included with any preliminary plat or site plan. 
A.  Name. Proposed name of development. 
B.  Property Owner Information. Name and address of the property owner, and the proposed subdivider or developer. 
C.  Applicant Information. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
D.  Survey Information. Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
E.  Proposed Use. Proposed use of the property. 
F.  Location. Location (land district and land lot) and size of property in acres or in square feet if less than an acre. 
G.  Location Sketch. Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. 
1.  Preparation. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. 
2.  USGS Maps. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
H.  Former Approved Subdivision. Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
I.  Zoning District. Zoning district designation of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
J.  Prior Approvals or Applications. Rezoning or special exception use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
K.  Approved Variances. Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
L.  Natural Features. Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all watercourses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The area of special flood hazard, the 100-year floodplain, if any, shall be outlined. 
M.  Man-Made Features. 
1.  Features. Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including all street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
2.  Identification of Public Streets and Areas. All streets and other areas designated for public use, or proposed to be dedication or reserved, should be identified. 
N.  Contours. Contours drawn at two-foot intervals or as may be approved by the Director of Engineering. 
O.  Project Layout. The proposed project layout including subdivision and site plan information as indicated below. 
1.  Required Subdivision Information. Proposed subdivision information shall include the following: 
(A)  Street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths; 
(B)  Lot lines, along with the front building setback line with the lot width; 
(C)  Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas to be included in the proposed subdivision; and 
(D)  A sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part when the preliminary plat submitted covers only a portion of the subdivider's entire holdings. 
2.  Site Plans. For multifamily and nonresidential development site plans, the following information shall be provided: 
(A)  The outline and location of all buildings; 
(B)  The location and relevant dimensions of all minimum building setback lines; 
(C)  The location of outdoor storage areas; 
(D)  The location of solid waste facilities; 
(E)  The location of buffers; 
(F)  The location of parking areas, driveways and curb cuts; and 
(G)  Designated fire lanes. 
P.  Phasing. The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
Q.  Water Supply. A statement as to the source of the domestic water supply. 
R.  Sanitary Sewage Disposal. A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, on-site individual or community sewage disposal systems must be approved by the health department. 
S.  Stormwater Detention. The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
T.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. For site plans, a statement of intent to comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of this UDO must be included on the plan and signed by a representative with soil erosion certification and their certification number listed. 
U.  Additional information. Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
Section 10.3.5. - Conservation Subdivision. 
A.  Conservation Resource Inventory Map. For project approval of a conservation subdivision, a conservation resource inventory map must be prepared, showing key site features and delineating primary conservation areas, secondary conservation areas if applicable, and other areas, as defined under the conservation subdivision provisions of this UDO. 
1.  Overlap of Areas. Where different areas overlap, the most restrictive area, that is the area with the lowest Usable Land Factor, is to be clearly delineated and given precedence over less restrictive types of areas. 
2.  Map Not Required for Submission. This map need not be submitted upon certification by a registered land surveyor that there are no primary conservation areas or secondary conservation areas if applicable located on the subdivision site, based on their personal on-site investigation and review of appropriate documents. 
B.  Aerial Photograph Required. The Conservation Resource Inventory Map may be drawn on a vertical aerial photograph of the site, prepared at the same scale as the Preliminary Plat, or an aerial photograph is to accompany the Conservation Resource Inventory Map and may be at the same or a smaller scale, but no smaller than 1 inch = 400 feet. The source of the aerial photograph and the date of the photography are to be indicated. 
C.  Map Requirements. The conservation resource inventory map is to be prepared by a Georgia licensed land surveyor and drawn at the same scale as the preliminary plat, no smaller than one inch = 100 feet. If more than one sheet is required in order to cover the site, the sheets are to be numbered in sequence and referenced to an index sheet. The map must specifically include the information listed below. 
1.  Physical and Legal Features. Physical and legal features of the site, such as: 
(A)  Outline of the boundary line of the subdivision site; 
(B)  Political jurisdiction lines (if any); 
(C)  Rights-of-way lines and names of all existing public roads, streets and highways on or abutting the site; 
(D)  Easements that traverse the site and the purpose of each, such as electric power transmission lines with the kilovolts indicated, liquid or natural gas transmission lines, other public or private utilities, private roads or ways, or similar easements; 
(E)  Topography of the site shown at two-foot contour intervals; and 
(F)  Perennial streams, creeks and rivers, and permanent water impoundments such as lakes and ponds. 
2.  Primary Conservation Areas. Primary conservation areas shall be indicated, including: 
(A)  Floodways within the 100-year floodplain; 
(B)  Required stream buffers; 
(C)  Wildlife habitats of threatened or endangered species; 
(D)  Cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(E)  Wetlands and hydric soils classified as "unsuitable;" and 
(F)  The limits of the 100-year floodplain. 
3.  Secondary Conservation Areas. Secondary conservation areas must be delineated only for resource conservation subdivisions, including: 
(A)  Areas of steep slopes over 25% greater than 5,000 contiguous square feet; 
(B)  Areas with slopes of 15% to 25% greater than 40,000 contiguous square feet; 
(C)  Soils with exposed bedrock or rock outcroppings greater than 40,000 contiguous square feet; 
(D)  Areas with soils classified as "poorly drained" greater than 80,000 contiguous square feet; 
(E)  Buffer areas around wetlands and habitats of endangered species; 
(F)  Mature timber stands or significant trees; 
(G)  Registered historic or archeological assets; 
(H)  Viewshed protection areas; 
(I)  Village greens, parkways; and 
(J)  Passive recreational areas. 
4.  Ownership and Applicant Information. Ownership/applicant information, including: 
(A)  Name of the subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision, or proposed name if not within an existing subdivision; 
(B)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the legal owner of the property; 
(C)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the person(s) or firms) responsible for subdivision professional design, design of public improvements and surveys; and 
(D)  Graphic scale, north arrow and date of drawing preparation. 
Section 10.3.6. - Plan for Maintenance of Open Space and Operation of Common Facilities. 
For project approval of a conservation subdivision, a plan for maintenance of open space and operation of common facilities must be submitted with the application for project approval and include the applicable information, as listed below. 
A.  Homeowners Association. Description of any proposed Homeowners Association, its bylaws, responsibilities, and endowment. 
B.  Nonprofit Conservation Organization or Land Trust. Description and documents relating to any private nonprofit conservation organization or land trust that will hold title to any portion of the open space. 
C.  Lands to be Dedicated. Description of lands proposed for dedication to the City. 
D.  Maintenance and Escrow Funds. Proposal for open space maintenance and operations escrow fund. 
Section 10.3.7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-16, adopted April 3, 2009, deleted § 10.3.7, which pertained to preliminary plat certifications and derived from the original codification of this Code, in its entirety. 
Section 10.3.8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-16, adopted April 3, 2009, deleted § 10.3.8, which pertained to evidence of project approval and derived from the original codification of this Code, in its entirety. 
Section 10.3.9. - Exemption from Changes in Zoning. 
Any subdivision that has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to this UDO, provided that final approval is obtained within one year of preliminary approval. 

 

 
ARTICLE 4. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Section 10.4.1. - Responsibility. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the city without first obtaining a site development permit from the Department of Engineering to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable, unless the activity is otherwise exempt from the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of the Land Development Activities Chapter of this UDO. 
B.  Landowner, Developer and Consultants. The landowner, developer and designated planners and engineer shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the City of Columbus, Georgia that effect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinances, stormwater management ordinance, flood plain ordinance, subdivision regulations, this ordinance, and other laws and ordinances, which regulate the development of land within the boundaries of the City of Columbus, Georgia. However, the owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
C.  Application for Development Permit. Any person seeking development activity on land within the city shall first submit to the Department of Engineering an application for a development permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this UDO. Any person seeking land-disturbing authorization without full development approval shall first submit an application including all civil design and construction drawings except the Street Improvement, Sewage Disposal and Domestic Water Supply Plans. 
D.  Review of Site Development and Grading Permits. The Department of Engineering is responsible for administering the review and approval process for issuance of site development and grading permits. 
1.  Distribution. The Department of Engineering shall forward a copy of the permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to other City departments, the City Arborist, the Georgia DOT, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. 
2.  Comments and Issuance of Permits. 
(A)  The Department of Engineering shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, and shall issue the development permit when there is compliance by the application with all requirements of this UDO. 
(B)  No development permit shall be issued prior to the approval of all other affected City departments, the Georgia DOT, the City Arborist or others as appropriate. 
E.  Effect of Plan Approval. Approval of plans by the Engineering Department shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional, corporation, or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
F.  Effect of Inspections. The completion of inspections by the City and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation, or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
G.  Effect of Land Development or Grading Permit. A land development or grading permit shall not be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all codes, ordinances, and other regulations of the City. 
H.  Issuance of Permits In Error. Any development permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this UDO shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
I.  Self-Permitting Authorized for Certain Actions. 
1.  Certificate of Self-permitting. 
(A)  Application. Those builders of single-family residences covered under this Section, that provide a qualified, responsible person trained in soil erosion control measures and who can demonstrate the knowledge and ability to design, install and maintain soil erosion measures, may apply for a certificate for self-permitting for covered residential projects. 
(B)  Definition of Qualified, Responsible Person. For the purposes of this Section a qualified, responsible person shall be an official or supervisor of the company with authority to implement or have implemented the necessary control measures. 
2.  Training for Self-permitting. The Department of Engineering provides an initial training session to assist applicants for self permitting in order to gain some of the necessary knowledge and ability to design, install and maintain soil erosion control measures. Qualified persons who attend the training session will be provided a certificate by the Department of Engineering. 
J.  Liability. 
1.  Liability Not Imposed. The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this Article, the issuance of a land development permit, or the compliance with the provisions of this UDO shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City or the Soil and Water Conservation Commission District for damage to any person or property. 
2.  Presumption of Violation not Created. The fact that any activity for which a land development has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this UDO or the terms of the permit. 
3.  Violation of State Requirements Not Permitted. Any provision of this UDO shall not permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any water of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Section 10.4.2. - Development Activities Authorized. 
A land development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. The permits listed below shall be required. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Utility Development. Utility Development Permit (UDP). 
C.  Minor Land Disturbance Permit. Minor Land Disturbing Activities Permit (MLD). 
D.  Site Development. Site Development Permit (SDP). A site development permit shall be required for all nonexempt land disturbing activities other than those requiring UDP or MLD permits. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.4.3. - Summary of Development Permit Types. 
The types of permits shall be required by project type are indicated in Table 10.4.1. 
Table 10.4.1  Required Permits by Project Type 

 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.4.4. - Application Requirements. 
A.  Application Submittal. The application for a development permit shall be submitted to the Engineering Department and must include the applicant's civil design and construction drawings, including for copies of an erosion and sediment control plan with supporting data, as appropriate to the proposed project. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this Section. 
B.  Completeness Review. The application shall be checked for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
Section 10.4.5. - Process for Approval of Development Permit. 
An application for a land development permit may proceed simultaneously with an application for a preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, but may not be issued prior to project approval of such plat or plan by the Planning Department, or prior to approval of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Protection plan by the City Arborist. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Application Requirements. An application for a land development shall include: 
(A)  Application on the form furnished by the Engineering Department; 
(B)  Three copies of the applicable civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards in this UDO; 
(C)  Preliminary plat or site plan requesting or reflecting project approval by the Planning Department, if applicable; 
(D)  Payment of any land development permit fee, as established from time to time by the City Council; and 
(E)  Additional requirements as specified by each type of permit, as stated below. 
2.  Other Agency Approval. The applicant may be required by the Engineering Department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(A)  The City Arborist; 
(B)  Fire Department; 
(C)  Muscogee County Health Department; 
(D)  Georgia DOT; 
(E)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources; 
(F)  US Army Corps of Engineers; or 
(G)  US Environmental Protection Agency. 
3.  Comments on Applications. Upon receipt of comments from other City departments, the Engineering Department shall indicate on a copy of the civil design and construction drawings or in writing all comments related to compliance with this UDO, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations under the purview of the City, as appropriate. 
4.  Forwarding of Comments. The Engineering Department shall forward to the applicant the City's review comments. 
5.  Compliance. The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the Planning Division. The owner shall also be responsible for obtaining approval from all other agencies affected by the project prior to issuance of the permit. 
6.  Decision on UDP and MLD Permit Applications. Applications for UDP and MLD will be approved or denied as soon as practical but not later than 15 working days after the application is filed. 
7.  Decision on SDP Permit Applications. Applications for SDP will be approved or denied as soon as practical but not later than 15 working days after the application is filed. 
8.  Minor Changes. Minor changes, revision notes or additions may be made by the reviewer upon the plans, if required for approval, notes shall be part of the approval permit. 
9.  Distribution of Copies. Two copies of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant; one of which shall be retained on site by the construction crew performing the activity. 
B.  Specific Requirements by Permit. Specific application requirements for each type of development permit are indicated below. 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Utility Development Permit (UDP). 
(A)  Applicability. Utility construction, as part of a larger development, such as a subdivision or industrial park, shall require a utility development permit (UDP). An application for a UDP shall include: 
(1)  A location plan; and 
(2)  Data to define the scope, location and narrative description of control measures to be taken, including a statement that compaction of trench backfill shall be equal to or greater than the density of adjacent soil and means of re-establishing vegetative stabilization. 
3.  Site Development Permits (SDP). 
(A)  Applicability. A site development permit shall be required for all nonexempt land disturbing activities other than those requiring MLD or UDP permits. 
(B)  SDP Application Requirements. 
(1)  An application for the SDP shall be submitted to the Department of Engineering, along with three sets of the Site Development plan including the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include as a minimum, the data specified in Section 10.5.2. of this Chapter and shall conform to the provisions of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Article of Chapter 8 of this UDO. All applications shall contain a certification that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. Prior to the approval of the application, a copy of the NOI, General Permit Fee Forms for EPD and the City along with proof of payment of all fees. Upon approval of the application, a minimum of eight sets shall be provided. One stamped approved set shall be kept on the project site at all times. 
(2)  A fee in the amount as set by the City Council from time to time, pursuant to Chapter 12 of this UDO. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity include in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8, half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the EPD; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the EPD, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. Since Columbus, Muscogee County has been designated, as a local issuing authority, $40.00 per acre of land disturbing activity calculated to the nearest one-tenth of an acre shall be paid to Columbus-Muscogee County. The other $40.00 per acre of land disturbing activity shall be paid to EPD. 
(C)  Action on SDP Application. 
(1)  A SDP application will be approved or denied as soon as practical but not later than 15 business days after application, and supporting data, is filed with the Engineering Department. If the application approval is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, and any variances required from stream buffer requirements of the Environmental Protection Chapter are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary as per Section 10.4.7., are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect with the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnish to the applicant. 
(D)  Phased Projects. If a tract is to be developed in stages, a separate permit shall be required for each stage. 
(E)  Application Process. Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required from stream buffer requirements of the Environmental Protection Chapter have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Issuing Authority and the Soil and Water Conservation District have entered into an agreement which allows the Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. 
(F)  Violations. The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(G)  Approval Voided. Approval of an application shall be void one year from approval date if no activity is commenced upon the site to allow issuance of a site development permit. This time may be extended if a written request is received by the City Engineer prior to expiration and it determines site conditions have not changed. If any ordinances are revised or additional ordinances added during that time frame then applicant must modify the plans to meet the new requirements. 
4.  Minor Land Disturbing Activities Permit (MLD). 
(A)  Minor Land Disturbing Activities Permits may be issued for a construction project that requires 2 weeks and less for completion and involves 1/8 acre or less of disturbed area. 
(B)  MLD Application. 
(1)  Eight copies of a site plan, as prepared for the building permit application, shall be submitted to the Department of Engineering. The plan shall show as a minimum, the location and type of temporary control measures, existing and proposed drainage facilities, existing buildings, easements, paving, etc., and narrative designating any necessary permanent stabilization. 
(2)  A fee in the amount as set by the City Council from time to time, pursuant to Chapter 12 of this UDO, shall be charged. 
(C)  Action on MLD Application. 
(1)  A MLD will be approved or denied as soon as practical but not later than 15 business days after the application if filed with the Department of Engineering. Minor changes, revisions, notes or additions may be made by the reviewer upon the plans, if required for approval, and such shall be a part of the approved permit. 
(2)  Four copies of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant, of which one copy will be submitted to the building permit section. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.4.6. - Flood Area Provisions. 
A.  When Permit Required. If development or construction is proposed within or affecting an area of special flood hazard (the 100-year flood plain), the development permit application shall include the following additional information. 
B.  Application for Permit. Application for a development permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following: plans showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
3.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in this Code; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
C.  Certification of Lowest Floor Elevation. 
1.  The owner shall obtain and record the actual certificated elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, as provided by a registered surveyor. 
2.  The Director of Engineering shall verify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
D.  Approved Plans. A copy of approved plans and permits shall be kept on the construction site at all times until final inspection has been made and approved. 
Section 10.4.7. - Required Performance Surety. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Effect of Previous Violations. If an applicant for a development permit has had two or more violations of previous development permits, this UDO or the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the Director of Engineering shall refer the development permit application to the City Council. The City Council may take such action as indicated below. 
1.  Denial of Application. The City Council may deny the development permit application. 
2.  Posting of Performance Bond. The City Council may require the applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit or any combination thereof. 
(A)  Maximum Amount of Bond. The bond may not exceed $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity. 
(B)  When Required. The bond shall be provided prior to issuing the development permit. 
(C)  Failure to Comply. If the applicant does not comply with these development regulations or with the conditions of the development permit after issuance, the City Council may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
3.  Approval of Permit. The City Council may approve issuance of the development permit and waive or reduce any performance bond requirement after consideration of such factors as proof of financial ability of the developer or the record of performance of compliance by the developer since the last violation, or any other factors the City Council considers relevant to the protection of the public from potential erosion or sedimentation violations. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.4.8. - Issuance of Land Development Permit. 
A.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A land development permit shall not be issued unless the erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the Engineering Department has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with all requirements of this UDO. If the development permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
B.  Issuance of Land Development Permit. Following satisfaction of all comments from the City and receipt of applicable performance surety as well as approvals from the City Arborist, all affected agencies, the Engineering Department shall issue a land development permit authorizing land-disturbing activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
C.  Permits for Phased Development. If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate development permit shall be required for each phase. 
D.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The land development may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or is in violation of this UDO. A holder of a development permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the development permit. 
Section 10.4.9. - Expiration of Permit. 
A.  Expiration. A development permit shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within 12 months from the date of issuance. 
B.  Renewal. Any development permit that has expired may be renewed by the Engineering Department within six months of expiration. If a development permit has expired for more than 12 months, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new development permit under the development regulations applicable at the time of the new permit application. 
ARTICLE 5. - CIVIL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS 

Section 10.5.1. - General Requirements. 
A.  Requirements for Development Activity. Persons seeking to perform development activity on land in the city shall not commence or proceed until civil design and construction drawings are approved and a land development permit is issued by the Engineering Department. The drawings described in this Article must accompany an application for a development permit. 
B.  Civil Design and Construction Drawings. The civil design and construction drawings for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this UDO, and shall include each of the plans in this Article as appropriate to the project. These plans include: 
1.  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan; 
2.  Grading plan; 
3.  Landscaping, buffer and tree protection plans; 
4.  Stormwater management site plan; 
5.  Street improvement plan; 
6.  Sewage disposal plan; and 
7.  Domestic water supply plan. 
C.  Preparation of Civil Design and Construction Plans. 
1.  Preparation. All civil design and construction plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a qualified design professional in addition, the landscaping, tree protection and buffer plan may be prepared by or under the supervision of an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture or a forester registered on a list approved by the City Arborist. 
2.  Certification. All plans are to be certified by a qualified design professional. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.5.2. - Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
A.  Compliance. Plans must be prepared to comply with the erosion and sedimentation control requirements using best management practices as provided in Chapter 8. 
1.  Design Criteria. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. 
2.  Plan Considerations. The erosion and sediment control plan shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. 
B.  Obtaining a Permit. A permit can only be obtained by the owner of the property. 
C.  Requirement for Site Development Permit. A site development permit shall be required for all nonexempt land disturbing activities other than those requiring UDP or MLD permits. 
D.  Data Required for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
1.  Narrative or Notes, and Other Information. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes, including the notations listed below. All notes and other information as required under the State General Permit shall also be provided on the plans. 
(A)  Installation of Control Measures. Clearing, grading, excavation, filling or other land disturbing activities shall not be permitted until approved erosion and sediment control measures have been installed, except those operations needed to install such measures. 
(B)  Notification. The Department of Engineering shall be notified 24 hours prior to commencing any activity, and when such measures are ready for inspection. 
(C)  Application of Control Measures. These erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all features of the construction site, including, but not limited to, street and utility installations as well as the protection of individual lots. 
2.  Existing and Proposed Land Uses. Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
3.  Identification of Property Owner. Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
4.  Identification of Local Contact. Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
5.  Size. Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
6.  Schedule of Activity. Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that: "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
7.  Storage Capacity. Stormwater and sediment management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage area and maintenance schedule. 
8.  Vegetative Plan. Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
9.  Details. Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
10.  Maintenance Statement. Maintenance statement, as follows: "Erosion control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." If full implementation of the approved plan does not prove for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source. 
11.  Location of State Waters. State waters within 200 feet of any part of the project and the 200-foot line. 
12.  Easements. Existing and proposed easements. 
13.  Sediment Control. A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
14.  Topographic and Soil Conditions. An adequate description of general topographic and soil conditions of the tract as available from the Pine Mountain Soil and Water Conservation District. 
15.  Maintenance Program. A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
E.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
F.  Maintenance. 
1.  Responsibility for Maintenance. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sediment control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
2.  Maintenance During Construction. All erosion and sediment control measures shall be continuously maintained by the developer/owner during the construction phase of the development and until permanent stabilization of ditches, shoulders, slopes and all disturbed areas is accomplished to eliminate the need for the temporary control measures which shall then be removed by same. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09; Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Section 10.5.3. - Grading Plan. 
A.  Existing and Proposed Contour Lines. Grading plans shall identify existing and proposed topographic contour lines at the interval required for erosion and sedimentation control plans, as provided in this Chapter. 
B.  Areas to Be Disturbed. Grading plans are to show all areas to be disturbed, and existing and finished topographic contour lines. Areas where earth or fill materials will be temporarily stored are to be identified. 
C.  Undisturbed Areas. Grading plans shall outline any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer or stream greenway area, and shall identify and describe the protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such area. 
D.  Effect of Area of Special Flood Hazard. If the property contains any area of special flood hazard, the 100-year flood plain, grading plans in and around the flood plain shall be designed in conformance to all requirements relating to flood damage prevention provisions of this UDO. 
Section 10.5.4. - Landscaping, Buffer and Tree Protection Plan. 
All proposed landscaping as required by this UDO, buffers, and trees to be retained or planted as required by the tree preservation and replacement provisions of this UDO, shall be illustrated on a landscaping, buffer and tree protection plan. The individual plans as described in this Section shall be consolidated as one plan and each shall be clearly shown. 
A.  Plan Approval Required. The landscaping, buffer and tree protection plan shall be reviewed and approved by the City Arborist prior to issuance of a development permit or any other activity resulting in grading, bulldozing, or other removal of existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. 
B.  Site Landscaping Plan. 
1.  Scale at 1 inch = 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
2.  Caption: 
(A)  The name of the development and its acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
(B)  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
(C)  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the applicant. 
(D)  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. 
(E)  The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
(F)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
3.  The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and stormwater detention areas. 
4.  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved or impervious surfaces. 
5.  The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
6.  The boundaries of all natural buffers, greenways and other areas required to remain undisturbed. 
7.  The boundaries of each required landscape strip. 
8.  A planting plan showing the location, size and common name of proposed plant materials. 
9.  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this UDO for landscape strips or parking lot landscaping. 
C.  Buffer Plan. A buffer plan shall be prepared for any buffer required in accordance with the specifications and standards contained in this UDO. 
1.  At a minimum, the buffer plan shall include: 
(A)  Caption, as required under Section 10.5.4.B.2 for site landscaping plans. 
(B)  The boundaries of each required buffer area. 
(C)  The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and stormwater detention areas. 
2.  For each natural undisturbed buffer, the plan shall include: 
(A)  Methods to be employed to protect the critical root zones of the trees in the buffer from disturbance during construction, including fencing details, erosion control, signage, etc. 
(B)  Proposed supplemental plantings required to maintain the visual screen required. 
3.  For each structural buffer, the plan shall include: 
(A)  All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
(B)  A planting plan showing the location, size and type of proposed plant materials. 
(C)  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this UDO for buffers. 
(D)  Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each buffer. 
D.  Tree Protection and Planting Plan. The tree protection and planting plan shall be required for any land disturbing activity. 
1.  Tree protection and planting plan; preparation. 
(A)  The tree protection and planting plan for any multifamily or nonresidential development shall be related to the site plan for the project. Combination of the tree protection and planting plan and the site landscaping plan is encouraged. 
(B)  For subdivisions, the tree protection and planting plan shall be drawn on a copy of the preliminary subdivision plat, to which the information required by this Subsection will be added. 
2.  The tree protection and planting plan shall include the following basics: 
(A)  For multifamily or nonresidential development projects, scale at 1 inch = 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
(B)  Caption, as required under Section 10.5.4.B.2 for site landscaping plans. 
(C)  The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and stormwater detention areas. 
(D)  Off-site easements that may be affected by tree plantings must also be shown. 
(E)  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved or impervious surfaces. 
(F)  The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
(G)  The boundaries of all natural buffers, greenways and other areas required to remain undisturbed. 
(H)  The boundaries of each required landscape area. 
3.  The tree protection and planting plan shall show the following: 
(A)  The extent of the development site or disturbed area, the gross area of the site, and the net site area to which the tree conservation requirements apply. 
(B)  Specimen trees: 
(1)  Each specimen tree to be removed, including its size in DBH and its common name. 
(2)  Each specimen tree that will remain on the development site and be protected during construction, including its size in DBH and its common name. 
(3)  All other trees or tree stands that are submitted for credit as part of the tree conservation requirement. 
(4)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a specimen tree that would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(C)  Tree plan: 
(1)  Limits of tree protection and planting areas, showing existing trees to be retained and new trees to be planted, specifying type and size. 
(2)  In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of trees in each stand that are submitted for credit by number and size. 
(3)  Calculations showing compliance with the tree unit requirements of the Tree Preservation and Replacement Article of the General Development Standards Chapter of this UDO. 
(4)  Planting schedule, if applicable. 
(5)  Curb stops to prevent vehicle overhang, where required to protect planting areas and vegetation. 
(D)  Irrigation. 
(1)  The tree protection and planting plan is to include a note indicating the type of irrigation to be used. If hand watering is the type to be used, the plan must show the location of water faucets or quick couplers that will be used for this purpose. 
(2)  If an irrigation system is provided, a separate irrigation plan is to be submitted showing the location of lines and heads, the spray radius for each head, all valves (control, shut off, drainage, etc.), timer and rain sensor location. The name and telephone number of a responsible 24-hour emergency contact shall be prominently displayed on the plan. 
(E)  During-construction activities: 
(1)  Methods to be employed to protect the critical root zones of the trees in the tree protection areas from disturbance during construction, including fencing details, erosion control, signage, etc. 
(2)  Staging areas for parking, materials storage, concrete washout, and debris burn and tub grinding. 
(F)  Additional information. Additional information that the City Arborist may require to provide a full understanding of conditions on the site and the elements of the proposed tree conservation plan or during-construction activities. 
(G)  Notes. Each tree protection and planting plan shall include notes clearly printed on each plan sheet, as shown in the following figure. 

 
Section 10.5.5. - Site Development Permit. 
A.  Site Development Permit Required. A site development permit is required for all developments, except for those specifically exempted in this UDO and shall include a stormwater management plan. 
B.  Submission of Plan. 
1.  Review and Approval. In order to obtain a site development permit, a stormwater management site plan showing the design of the development shall be provided to the Department of Engineering for review and approval. 
2.  Effect on Permits. A development permit, building permit or land disturbance permit shall not be issued without an approved stormwater management site plan. 
C.  General Standards. All drainage facilities shall be included in a surface drainage plan and shall be so designed to serve the entire drainage area. No increase in peak discharge to existing streams or stormwater sewers shall be permitted unless calculations are submitted and approved showing that such increase will not adversely affect upstream or downstream conditions. 
D.  Requirements for Proposed Improvements. The location and size of all proposed stormwater improvements shall be designed in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2. 
E.  Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include the information listed below, as more specifically detailed in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2. 
1.  Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis. 
(A)  A topographic map of existing site conditions (minimum 2-foot contour interval) with the basin boundaries indicated. 
(B)  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project. 
(C)  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features. 
(D)  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities. 
(E)  Direction of flow and exits from the site. 
(F)  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site. 
(G)  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
2.  Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis. 
(A)  A topographic map of developed site conditions (2-foot contour interval required) with the post-development basin boundaries indicated. 
(B)  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project. 
(C)  Unified stormwater sizing criteria runoff calculations for water quality, channel protection, overbank flooding protection and extreme flood protection for each sub-basin. 
(D)  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection areas, such as natural buffers and tree protection areas (see the General Development Standards Chapter of this UDO), and primary and secondary conservation areas (see the Resource Conservation Chapter of this UDO). 
(E)  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are proposed to be utilized. 
(F)  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
3.  Stormwater Management System. 
(A)  Drawing or sketch of the stormwater management system including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls. This drawing is to show design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes. 
(B)  Narrative describing that appropriate and effective structural stormwater controls have been selected. 
(C)  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system. This is to include supporting calculations showing that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria. 
(D)  Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs). 
(E)  Documentation and supporting calculations showing that the stormwater management system adequately meets the unified stormwater sizing criteria. 
(F)  Drawings, design calculations and elevations for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow. 
4.  Downstream Analysis. Supporting calculations for a downstream peak flow analysis using the ten-percent rule necessary to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. 
5.  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan. The Stormwater Management Site Plan submission must be accompanied by an Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan prepared in accordance with Section 10.5.2. The erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan must include: 
(A)  All the elements specified in the Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act and local ordinances and regulations; 
(B)  Sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures; and 
(C)  Temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
6.  Landscaping Plan. The Stormwater Management Site Plan submission must be accompanied by landscaping, buffer and tree protection plans prepared in accordance with Section 10.5.4. as applicable to the project. The landscaping, buffer and tree protection plans must include: 
(A)  The arrangement of planted areas, natural areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
(B)  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; and 
(C)  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction. 
7.  Operations and Maintenance Plan. Description of maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. 
8.  Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Local and Nonlocal Permits. Such evidence shall include a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) form submitted to DNR under General Permit No. GAR100000 (relating to authorization under NPDES for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity). 
9.  Waiver Requests (if any). Waivers from the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual will be considered by the Engineering Department on a case-by-case basis. Waivers may be granted only when a requirement is shown to be impractical or having no benefit on adequate stormwater management of the site, or for an alternative approach that will have greater benefit and practicality than that otherwise required. See also Special Exception Variances, Section 10.11.4.C.2(A). 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.5.6. - Street Improvement Plan. 
A.  Plans must include centerline profiles and typical street sections at 50-foot intervals of all proposed streets. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
B.  Where sanitary sewer or storm water sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile (as required by Columbus Water Works). 
C.  Center line profiles covering streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this UDO for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
D.  All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into US. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation benchmarks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
E.  A street striping and signage plan, showing improvements in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to 4 or more lanes. 
Section 10.5.7. - Sewage Disposal Plan. 
A.  Public Sanitary Sewer. 
1.  Connection Required. When, in the written opinion of the Health Department and the Columbus Water Works, public sanitary sewer is within a reasonable distance, the subdivider shall tie into this system and provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. 
2.  Installation. All street sewers serving lots shall be installed by the subdivider. 
3.  Sanitary Sewerage Plans. Sanitary sewerage plans, including profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information, shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Columbus Waterworks. 
B.  Private Sanitary Sewer. 
1.  Public Sewer Not Accessible. When public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternative method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community sewerage disposal system may be used, provided the system is in compliance with the standards of the Health Department. 
2.  On-site Disposal Systems. For projects to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation tests, and other information shall be shown as required by the Health Department. 
Section 10.5.8. - Domestic Water Supply Plan. 
A.  Public Water. 
1.  Connection Required. When, in the written opinion of the Health Department and the Columbus Water Works, public water supply is within a reasonable distance, the subdivider shall install a system of water mains and connect to the public water supply. 
2.  Installation. The installation of mains and connection to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of streets. 
3.  Domestic Water Supply Plan. The domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the Columbus Waterworks. 
B.  Private Water. Where public water is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system acceptable to and approved by the Health Department. 
ARTICLE 6. - FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT 

Section 10.6.1. - Responsibility. 
A.  Planning Director. The Planning Director shall be responsible for coordination of the approval process for all final subdivision plats. 
B.  Certification and Seal. The final subdivision plat shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
C.  Compliance. The owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this UDO. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of this responsibility. 
Section 10.6.2. - Procedures for Final Plat Approval. 
A.  Installation of Public Improvements. Prior to submission of an application for final plat approval, all public improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this UDO. However, installation of traffic signs, street name signs, street striping and signalization shall not be required prior to submission. 
B.  Application Submission. Application for a final subdivision plat approval shall be made to the Planning Division. The application shall include the items listed below. 
1.  Application Form. A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Planning Division, requesting final subdivision plat review. 
2.  Copies. The required number of copies of the final subdivision plat drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications in this Section. 
3.  Fees. Payment of all applicable final subdivision plat application and review fees, as established by the City Council. 
4.  Payment for Signs, Striping and Signalization. Payment to the City for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be included in the application. 
5.  Maintenance Bond. A maintenance bond or letter of credit providing for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this UDO in the subdivision for a period of two years following the date of acceptance by the City Council. 
C.  Completeness Review. The Planning Division shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
D.  Compliance with this UDO. Within 30 days following receipt of the application, the Planning Director shall indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this UDO. The Planning Director shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this UDO to the final plat. 
E.  Compliance. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements, and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments of provided by the Planning Division. Resubmission of all revised drawings shall be made to the Planning Director. 
F.  Certificate of Final Approval. 
1.  Approval. When all of the requirements of this UDO, and any conditions of zoning approval, have been met, the Planning Director shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. 
2.  Distribution. The executed original of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and the Planning Division shall retain such number of copies as determined necessary. 
G.  Effect of Final Certification. Once the final subdivision plat has been so certified, it shall be recorded by the applicant with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.6.3. - General Standards. 
A.  Final Plat Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by O.C.G.A. 15-6-67 for the recordation of maps and plats and as acceptable to the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
B.  Conformance with Preliminary Plat. The final subdivision plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this UDO. 
C.  Complete Survey of Property. The final subdivision plat shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The final subdivision plat shall show all lots being subdivided if said lots are ten (10) acres or less. 
2.  Lots subdivided from a lot larger than ten (10) acres or more in size shall show only the new lots being created from the larger lot. The remaining larger lot remnant shall be noted on the plat as the "Parent lot" on said final plat. Said requirement shall only apply to residential properties. Said lot shall be limited to the subdivision of five (5) new lots. If more than five (5) lots are subdivided, then the entire property shall be surveyed. 
(Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 10.6.4. - Final Plat Requirements. 
The final subdivision plat shall contain all caption information and plat data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps or plats, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as well as the additional information required in this Section. 
A.  Caption. The maps or plats shall have a title or name, including the name of the subdivision, which shall be contained in the caption, and the caption shall also provide the following information: 
1.  The county, land district and land lot, and subdivision, if the property lies within a particular subdivision; 
2.  The date of plat preparation; 
3.  The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
4.  The name, address, telephone number, and registration number of the land surveyor or the statement that he is the county surveyor and is not required by law to be a registered surveyor; and 
5.  All reproductions of original maps or plats shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registrant placed across the registration seal in order to be a valid or recordable map or plat. 
B.  Plat Data. Maps or plats shall be made and prepared in a professional manner and in accordance with the standards of good drafting procedures and shall show the following information, as specified below. 
1.  Point of Reference. All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
2.  Bearings. All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings of all lines of the boundary or lot lines, and distances of all boundary or lot lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet. 
3.  Right-of-way Widths. All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights of way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
4.  Easements and Encroachments. All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent. 
5.  Curved Lines. In the case of curved lines, the curve shall be defined by curve data to include the radius, arc length, chord bearing, and distance for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves. 
6.  Lines and Boundaries. All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county state boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. 
7.  Description of Markers. All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone. 
8.  Arrows. An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearings to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone. 
9.  Horizontal Distances. All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal. 
10.  Angular Directions. All angular directions shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees and minutes. Where plats state or surveys require accuracy in excess of 1 in 5,000, the angular directions shall be represented in degrees, minutes, and seconds. All angular directions shall be referenced to the principal meridian. 
11.  State Plane Coordinates. All maps or plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a National Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property mapped or platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
12.  Adjacent Subdivisions and Record Owners. The name of all adjacent subdivisions and record owners of an unsubdivided property adjoining the proposed subdivision. 
C.  Additional Data. The data listed below is to be shown on the final plat in addition to the caption information and plat data required by Georgia law. 
1.  Street Names. Street names including both the name and the suffix, such as "street," "avenue," etc. 
2.  Monuments and Markers. Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
3.  Former Name. Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
4.  Location. Location sketch. 
5.  Lot Lines. Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
6.  Setback Lines. Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
7.  Lots, Sites and Blocks. Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
8.  Easements. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
9.  Private Covenants. A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
10.  Special Flood Hazards. The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this UDO. 
D.  Roadway Curve and Centerline Data. 
1.  Curve Data. Curve data shall be required for all roadway centerline curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. 
2.  Centerline Data. Centerline data including the radius, central angle, arc length, chord bearing and distance, and tangent distance between curves must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting roads. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.6.5. - Surveyor and Owner Certificates. 
Each final subdivision plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. The original certificates on the reproducible copy of the final plat shall be signed and dated. 
A.  Surveyor's Certificate. A surveyor's certificate, to read as shown and signed in blue ink on the original drawing. 
B.  Surveyor's Seal. A surveyor's seal. The reproducible final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
C.  Owner's Certificate. Owner's certificate, to read as shown and signed in blue ink on the original drawing. 

 

 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.6.6. - Statement of Private Covenants. 
A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: "This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated _______, which hereby becomes part of this plat." 
Section 10.6.7. - Certification by Health Department. 
Certification by the Health Department shall be printed or stamped on the plat, as appropriate to the source of water supply and method of waste disposal approved. The certification by the Health Department is to read as shown and signed in blue ink on the original drawing. For developments with public sewerage and public water systems, this certification may be omitted. Health Department certification shall be required per the following state requirements: 
Any division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided; however; that the following are not included within this definition: 
A.  The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules. 
B.  The division of land into parcels, all of which are three acres or more in size with minimum width of one hundred and fifty feet (150') for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 10-34, § 1, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 10.6.8. - Certificate of Final Subdivision Plat Approval. 
The appropriate certificate of final plat approval shall be stamped or printed on the final subdivision plat for execution upon its approval. 

 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 10.6.9. - Acceptance of Public Improvements. 
A.  Required Completion. If construction of any required public improvements was deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work shall have been completed during the two-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
B.  Final Acceptance Inspection. Prior to expiration of the maintenance bond, the Engineering Department shall conduct a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements. 
C.  Correction of Defects. The owner shall correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
Section 10.6.10. - Replatting or Resububdivision. 
The replatting or resubdivision of land shall follow the same procedures, rules and regulations as required for the approval and recordation of a final plat. 

 

 
ARTICLE 7. - CHANGES TO HISTORIC PROPERTIES 

Section 10.7.1. - Method for Material Changes. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or historic district, a material change in appearance of the historic property or of a historic or non-historic building structure, site, or work of art within the district shall not be permitted until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Board of Historic and Architectural Review (BHAR). 
Section 10.7.2. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this Article shall apply to any historic property and to any historic or non-historic building, structure, site, or work of art within an historic district. 
A.  Existing Properties, Buildings and Structures. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the BHAR prior to any material change in appearance. 
B.  New Structures. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the BHAR prior to erecting a new building, or parking lot on a historic property or within a historic district. 
C.  Demolition or Relocation. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained prior to demolition or relocation of a building, structure, or work or art on a historic property or within a historic district. 
D.  Workmanship. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from BHAR board prior to abrasive cleaning and/or sandblasting of exterior walls. 
E.  Interior Alternations. In its review of applications for certificates of compliance, the BHAR shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
Section 10.7.3. - Material Changes. 
Material changes in appearance, include the installation or removal of, but are not limited to: 
A.  Decks, patios, driveways, and walks; 
B.  Metal awnings or metal canopies; 
C.  Exterior door or doorframe, or the infill of an existing exterior door opening; 
D.  Exterior wall, including the enclosure of any porch or other outdoor area; 
E.  Relocation of wood, chain link, masonry or garden walls or wrought iron fencing, or the removal of masonry or garden walls, wood, or wrought iron fencing; 
F.  Fire escapes, exterior stairs or ramps for the handicap; 
G.  Railing or other wood, wrought iron or masonry detailing; 
H.  New roofing materials, or removal of existing roofing materials; 
I.  Security grilles; 
J.  New exterior siding materials, or removal of existing exterior siding materials; 
K.  Exterior skylights; 
L.  Screen windows or exterior screen or exterior screen doors and storm windows or storms doors; or 
M.  Exterior window or window frame or window shutters or the infill of an existing exterior window opening. 
Section 10.7.4. - BHAR Actions on Material Changes. 
The BHAR may take the following actions: 
A.  Approve a request for material change as proposed; 
B.  Approve a request for material change with any modifications it deems necessary; or 
C.  Reject a request for a material change. 
Section 10.7.5. - Criteria for Approval. 
The BHAR shall approve an application if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or district. Material changes must be compatible in terms of: 
A.  Height; 
B.  Proportion of building's facades; 
C.  Proportion of openings within the facility; 
D.  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades; 
E.  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets; 
F.  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection; 
G.  Relationship of materials, texture and color; 
H.  Roof shape; 
I.  Walls of continuity; 
J.  Scale of buildings; and 
K.  Directional expression of front elevation. 
Section 10.7.6. - Relocation. 
A decision by the BHAR approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by the criteria listed below: 
A.  Contributions. The historic character and aesthetic interest the building structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
B.  Plans for Vacation. Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding areas will be. 
C.  Relocation. Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
D.  Relocation Area. Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
Section 10.7.7. - Demolition. 
A decision by the BHAR approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by the criteria listed below. 
A.  Significance. The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the buildings, structure, sites, or object. 
B.  Ambiance. The importance of the building, structure, site or object to the ambiance of a district. 
C.  Reproduction of Site. The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location. 
D.  Rarity. Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the country. 
E.  Property Reuse. Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
F.  Reasonable Measures. Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse. 
Section 10.7.8. - Review Procedure. 
A.  Notice. Prior to reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the BHAR shall take such action as may be reasonably required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially be the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the BHAR deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
B.  Review Period. There shall be a 45-day review period for all application. The time period does not begin until applications are deemed complete. Proper documentation shall include drawings, plans and pictures of the proposed alternations and materials as specified in the application. 
C.  Evidence of Approval. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the BHAR. 
D.  Failure to Act. Failure to act within the 45-day period shall constitute approval. 
E.  Posting. Certificates of approval must be posted on the property. 
F.  Applications for New Construction. New applications for construction shall be accompanied by a building elevation of the adjoining properties with a minimum of 100 feet in distance. 
G.  Adjoining Properties. New applications for construction shall be accompanied by a building elevation of the adjoining properties with a minimum of 100 feet in distance. 
H.  Demolition. In cases of demolition, the BHAR shall have a total of 90 days to either approve or reject an application. 
I.  Denial or Rejection of Application. In the event that the application is rejected, reasons for doing so shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
J.  Building Permits. A building permit will not be issued when a certificate of appropriateness is requested. 
K.  Appeals. Appeals may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
ARTICLE 8. - BUILDING PERMITTING 

Section 10.8.1. - Procedure to Obtain a Building Permit. 
Refer to Section 8-14.4 of the Columbus Code for Building Permit Requirements and Fees. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09; Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Section 10.8.2. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
A.  Certificate of Occupancy Required. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the Inspections and Code Enforcement Department stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this UDO and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the City. 
B.  Permanent Electrical Power. Permanent electric power may not be supplied to any structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued and the power company contacted by the Director of Inspections and Codes. 
C.  Temporary Certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion. A temporary certificate of occupancy may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public, and no violation exists. 
D.  Activities Requiring a Certificate. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following activities. 
1.  Occupancy and Use. Prior to occupancy and use of a building or structure, whether newly constructed or enlarged. 
2.  Change in Use. Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
3.  Change of a Nonconforming Use. Any change in use of a nonconforming use. 
E.  Records of Certificates. The Director of Inspections and Codes shall maintain a record of all certificates of occupancy and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
ARTICLE 9. - SIGN PERMITS 

[Section 10.9.1. - Sign Permits.] 
See the Sign Regulations Article of the General Development Standards Chapter of this UDO for sign permits. 
ARTICLE 10. - TEXT AMENDMENTS 

[Section 10.10.1.0. - Text Amendments.] 
This UDO may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by the City Council under the provisions of this Section. 
Section 10.10.1. - Initiation. 
A proposed change to the text of this UDO may be initiated by the City Council or the Planning Advisory Commission by a majority vote of those voting, or by the Director of Planning. 
Section 10.10.2. - Text Amendment Process. 
A.  Planning Advisory Public Hearing. Before the City Council may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the Planning Advisory Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
B.  Calling, Advertising and Holding of Public Hearings. Amendments to the text of this UDO shall follow the same process as a zoning change with regard to the calling, advertising and holding of public hearings. 
Section 10.10.3. - Standards for Text Amendments. 
A.  Changes to Land Development Regulations. The Planning Advisory Commission and the City Council shall consider the standards of this Section in considering any proposal that would result in a change to the text of this UDO, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal. 
B.  Standards for Text Changes. The standards listed below shall be utilized when any consideration for a change to the text of these land development regulations is considered. 
1.  Consistency with Land Development Regulations. Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this UDO as stated under Chapter 1? 
2.  Compatibility with Comprehensive Plan. Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
3.  Changing Conditions. Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions in the city or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
4.  Protection of the Public. Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
Section 10.10.4. - Effect of a Text Amendment. 
A.  Effective Date. Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. 
B.  Existing Uses and Structures. For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this UDO prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed by the provisions of this UDO relating to nonconformities. 
C.  Existing Building Permits. Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this UDO prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed by the provisions of this UDO relating to nonconformities. 
ARTICLE 11. - APPEALS 

Section 10.11.1. - Types of Appeals. 
Persons may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals for relief under the following circumstances listed below. 
A.  Action by Administrative Official. When aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of an administrative official of the City made under this UDO. 
B.  Special Exception. When a special exception is desired for a particular property from certain requirements of this UDO., as specified in this Section. 
C.  Creation of Hardship. When compliance with the requirements of this UDO would create a particular and unique hardship. 
D.  Flood Protection and Historic Structures. When the requirements for flood protection affect an historic structure. 
E.  Effect of a Certificate of Appropriateness. When aggrieved by the provisions of a Certificate of Appropriateness for a historic structure. 
Section 10.11.2. - Initiation. 
A.  Requests for Relief. All requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided in this Section. 
B.  Administration. The Director of Inspections and Code shall administer the appeals process including: 
1.  Acceptance of application; 
2.  Referral of the appeal to the appropriate administrative official; 
3.  Forwarding the appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals; and 
4.  Maintaining a record of the proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 10.11.3. - Appeals of an Administrative Decision. 
A.  Initiation of Appeals. Appeals of an administrative decision may be initiated by any person aggrieved by a decision made under this UDO or by an officer or department head of the City. Such appeal shall be initiated within 15 days of the action or decision appealed from by filing with the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement a notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
B.  Referral. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement will refer the appeal to the appropriate administrative official, who will attempt to resolve the issue within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Unresolved issues will be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals for final action. 
C.  Interpretations. The Board of Zoning Appeals, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement, shall take one of the actions listed below. 
1.  Establish an Interpretation. Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this UDO. 
2.  Boundary Determination. Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
3.  Decision on an Appeal. Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any City official or other person acting under authority of this UDO, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this UDO is alleged. 
4.  Other Interpretation. Interpret such other provisions of this UDO as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
D.  Effect of Appeal. An appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer or department head from whom the appeal is made certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which must be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Effect of Decision. A decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 10.11.4. - Special Exception Variances. 
A special exception variance may be granted subject to the requirements of this Section. 
A.  General Limitations on Relief. Special exception variances shall be limited to relief from the following requirements of this UDO: 
1.  Minimum building setbacks; 
2.  Maximum building height; 
3.  Minimum lot width; 
4.  Public street frontage; 
5.  Buffers and screening; 
6.  Signage, in accordance with a uniform sign plan; 
7.  Parking requirements; 
8.  Roadway widths; 
9.  Stormwater management requirements; and 
10.  Soil erosion and sedimentation requirements 
B.  Standards for Approval. A special exception variance may be granted upon a finding that the relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity nor diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood or impair the purpose and intent of the UDO. 
C.  Administrative Approval. Special exception variances shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless the variance is approved administratively. Only those variances listed below, and within the parameters stated, may be considered for administrative approval. 
1.  Director of Inspections and Code. The Director of Inspections and Code, upon a finding that a special exception variance complies the standards for approval contained in this Section, may administratively approve such special exception variance within and not exceeding the parameters listed below. 
(A)  Minimum Setbacks. Minimum building setbacks, not to exceed a reduction in the minimum setback required by 25%. 
(B)  Maximum Building Height. Maximum building height, not to exceed an additional four feet above the maximum allowed. 
2.  Director of Engineering. The Director of Engineering, upon a finding that a special exception variance meets the standards for approval contained in this Section, may administratively approve such special exception variance within and not exceeding the following parameters: 
(A)  Stormwater Management. Variances to stormwater management requirements listed below: 
(1)  Waivers. The Engineering Department may grant a waiver from the provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual when a requirement is shown to be impractical or having no benefit on adequate stormwater management of the site, or for an alternative approach that will have greater benefit and practicality than that otherwise required. Such determination shall be made at the sole discretion of the City Engineer based on credible evidence and good engineering practices. 
(2)  Alternative Stormwater Management Plan. 
(a)  If exceptional circumstances applicable to the site exist such that strict adherence to ordinary provisions will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of this UDO, an alternative stormwater management plan may be approved, following sound engineering practices. 
(b)  The Engineering Department may not grant a variance if the proposed development will change the rate or volume of runoff significantly, have a significant, negative impact on any wetland, watercourse or waterbody, or contribute to degradation of water quality. 
(B)  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Variances to soil erosion and sedimentation requirements listed below. 
(1)  The Engineering Department may allow a reduction of larger buffers down to the established 25-foot buffer along the banks of any state waters that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as determined by the Director of Engineering or where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure must be constructed. 
(2)  Adequate erosion control measures are to be incorporated in the project plans and specification and implemented. 
(C)  Parking. Parking requirements, not to exceed a reduction from the minimum required by 10%, nor an increase in the maximum allowed by 10%. 
D.  Effect of Denial. If denied, an application for a special exception variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial. However, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
E.  Prohibited Special Exception Variances. In no case shall a special exception variance be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a property through a zoning change granted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09; Ord. No. 11-55, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Section 10.11.5. - Hardship Variances. 
A hardship variance may be granted subject to the requirements of this Section. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Relief from Hardship. Relief from the application of the provisions of this UDO may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
2.  Limit on Grant of Relief. Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
B.  Standards for Approval. A hardship variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Zoning Appeals that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; or 
2.  The application of this UDO to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; or 
3.  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
C.  Effect of Denial. If denied, an appeal for a hardship variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial. However, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
D.  Prohibited Hardship Variances. In no case shall a hardship variance be granted for any of the following reasons or circumstances. 
1.  Investments or Real Estate. A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
2.  Conditions of Zoning Approval. A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change granted by the City Council. 
3.  Lot Size Reduction. Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
4.  Prohibited Land Uses. A use of land or buildings or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
5.  Increase in Dwelling Units. Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
Section 10.11.6. - Flood Protection Variances. 
A.  Limit on Variances. Flood protection variances may be approved only for the circumstances listed below: 
1.  Historic Structures. Reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places provided that the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the building losing its historical designation. 
2.  Functionally Dependent Use. For the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
B.  Criteria for Variances. In passing upon a flood protection variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this UDO relating to flood damage prevention, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this UDO, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of the variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of flood damage prevention. 
D.  Prohibited Variances. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood elevation would result. 
E.  Conditions for Variances. Conditions for flood protection variances are as provided below. 
1.  Minimum Variance. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of an historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historical character and design of the building. 
2.  Additional Standards. Variances shall only be approved upon: 
(A)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(B)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(C)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Notice of Approved Variance. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  Records. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 4-3-09) 
Section 10.11.6.1. - Watershed Protection Variances. 
A watershed protection variance may be granted by the Council of Columbus subject to the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Criteria for Variances. Watershed protection variances shall be limited to relief from the following requirements: 
1.  If the applicant complies with the buffer widths and required practices, he or she can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of, his or her property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater profit from the property shall not be considered adequate justification for a variance. Moreover, the local government shall consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from the buffer widths that shall make reasonable use of the property possible; and 
2.  The hardship results from application of the buffer widths to the property rather than from other factors such as unrelated deed restrictions; and 
3.  The hardship is due to the physical nature of the applicant's property, such as its size, shape, or topography; and 
4.  The applicant did not cause the hardship; and 
5.  The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the riparian buffer widths and required practices and preserves the purpose thereof; and 
6.  In granting the variance, the public safety and welfare have been assured, and the quality of downstream water, including but not limited to water used to supply public drinking water, has been maintained or improved; and 
7.  The applicant certifies that the applicant has not and does not intend to apply for a variance from the minimum buffer requirements contained in the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act for the same perennial stream or streams for which a variance is sought pursuant to this paragraph. 
B.  Administrative Approval. The Director of Engineering, upon finding that a watershed protection variance meets the standards for approval contained in this Section, may administratively approve such watershed protection variance within and not exceeding the following parameters: 
1.  The Engineering Department may allow a reduction of the 150-feet buffer requirement of the 7-mile radius area of the Lake Oliver water supply reservoir down to a 100-foot buffer along the banks of the reservoir boundaries. 
2.  The Director of Engineering shall grant a variance based on the criteria as set forth in Section 10.11.6.1.A. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 5-25-10) 
Section 10.11.7. - Variance from a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Board of Historic Architectural Review and/or the Uptown Facade Board relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
A.  Applications for Appeal. 
1.  Maximum Filing Period. Appeals must be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or in the case of a failure of the Board of Historic Architectural Review and/or the Uptown Facade Board to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the board action. 
B.  Standards for Granting an Appeal. 
1.  Actions by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the Board of Historic Architectural Review and/or the Uptown Facade Board. 
2.  Criteria for Determination or Decisions. Determinations may only be made if a majority of the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the Board of Historic Architectural Review and/or the Uptown Facade Board abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 5-25-10) 
Section 10.11.8. - Process for Granting Appeals. 
A.  Application. An application for an appeal shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The application must include a clear statement of the basis for the appeal and the action requested. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. 
B.  Referral. Upon receiving a complete application of an appeal, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall refer the application to the appropriate administrative official. Within 15 days of receipt of a complete application: 
1.  The administrative official shall resolve the issue administratively, if possible; or 
2.  If administrative resolution is not possible, the administrative official shall assemble such memos, papers, plans or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved, and prepare a written response. 
C.  Failure to Resolve. If the issue cannot be resolved administratively, within 30 days of receipt of the complete application, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall send to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the appellant the written response of the appropriate administrative official. 
D.  Schedule for Consideration. The appeal shall be scheduled for the next scheduled meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals after 30 days following receipt of a complete application for the appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement and for which adequate public notice can be given. 
E.  Public Notice. 
1.  Required Period of Notice. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The Inspections and Code Enforcement Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
2.  Notice Required. A request for any type of variance or appeal shall be heard at a public hearing only upon the provision of notice as provided below. 
(A)  Published Notice. The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action. 
(B)  Mail Notice. 
(1)  A minimum of seven days prior to public hearing, the applicant shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons with interest and all property owners within 300 feet of the property that is the subject matter of the request. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the ad valorem tax records. 
(2)  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
F.  Withdrawal of an Appeal. Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal prior to the meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. The appeal shall thereupon be removed from the Board's agenda and the request shall have no further effect. 
G.  Board of Zoning Appeals Public Hearing. 
1.  Convening of Meeting. The public hearing shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson or the Board of Zoning Appeals' designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official. 
2.  Record of Appeal. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement of shall submit the assembled record of the appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement, or other appropriate party if the appeal was taken from an administrative action or interpretation, shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal. 
3.  Appearances at the Hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(A)  Presentation. A person in attendance shall not speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. 
(B)  Identification. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state their name and home address. 
(C)  Limits on Presentations. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the total time allowed for presentation of the request. 
(D)  General Public Presentations. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the appellant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
4.  Order of Public Presentations. The appellant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the request. Others in support of the request may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the request. 
5.  Rebuttal. The appellant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the request at the hearing. 
6.  Cross-examination Permitted. Upon request, the Presiding Official shall allow cross-examination of witnesses by representatives of the appellant or the opposition. 
7.  Questions by Board of Zoning Appeals. During the public hearing, Board of Zoning Appeals members may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
8.  Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. At the meeting, following presentation of the appeal, action shall be taken by vote of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Motion to Approve or Deny. A motion to approve or deny an appeal must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting in order for the motion to be approved. 
(B)  Failure of Motion to Approve. If a motion to approve an appeal fails, the appeal is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal fails, another motion would be in order. 
(C)  Effect of Tie Vote. A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(D)  Failure to Act. If no action is taken on an appeal, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
9.  Board of Zoning Appeals Actions. In taking action on an appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals may: 
(A)  Approve, approve with changes, approve with conditions, or deny the request; or 
(B)  Table the appeal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
(C)  Allow withdrawal of the appeal at the request of the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
ARTICLE 12. - TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMITTING 

Section 10.12.1. - Temporary suspension of permitting. 
A.  Permits Affected by Owner-Initiated Zoning Change. Upon submission of a valid application by a property owner for a zoning change or for the granting of an appeal on a property, permits shall not be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property that may be affected by the outcome of such application. 
B.  Permits Affected by City Council-Initiated Zoning District or UDO Text Change. Upon the initiation of a zoning change or text amendment to this UDO by the City Council, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on any property that may be affected by the outcome of such zoning change or text amendment. 
Chapter 11 - NONCONFORMITIES 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 11.1.1. - Effect of a Variance. 
The grant of a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall eliminate a specific nonconformity or nonconformities, unless the applicant or owner fails to comply with specified time limits established by the Board. The grant of a variance shall place the nonconformity into a conforming status. 
Section 11.1.2. - Existing Residential Lots of Record. 
In any residential zoning district that allows a single-family dwelling, an existing lot of record that does not comply with minimum lot size or minimum lot dimensions of that district may be used for a detached single-family dwelling, subject to the standards listed below. 
A.  Minimum Side and Side Corner Yard. A minimum side yard and side corner yard shall be provided consistent with the requirements of the zoning district shall be provided. 
B.  Minimum Front and Rear Yards. A front and rear yard consistent with the requirements of the zoning district shall be provided. 
Section 11.1.3. - Existing Nonresidential Lots of Record. 
In any nonresidential zoning district an existing lot of record that does not comply with minimum lot size or lot dimensions of the applicable zoning district may be used for any permitted or special exception use, subject to the requirements of this UDO. 
Section 11.1.4. - Permitted and Special Exception Uses as Legal Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Permitted Uses and Nonconforming Uses. For the purposes of this UDO, the term permitted use shall not be deemed to include a legal nonconforming use. 
B.  Special Exceptions as Legal Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Exclusion. For the purposes of this UDO, the term special exception use shall not be deemed to include a legal nonconforming use. 
2.  Uses Classified as a Special Exception. 
(A)  Status. A use legally established as a permitted use prior to the effective date of these regulations that now is considered a special exception use in the applicable zoning district shall be a permitted use. 
(B)  Compliance with Special Exception Criteria. If an application for expansion, rehabilitation, renovation, repair or similar improvements to a structure or use is submitted to the City, special exception use approval shall be necessary if the application complies with either or both of the standards listed below. 
(1)  The value of the proposed work is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the value of the improvements. 
(2)  The structure or use is destroyed or damaged to an extent that is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the value of the improvements. 
Section 11.1.5. - Lot Size. 
A.  Creation of Nonconforming Lot Prohibited. A lot or group of adjacent lots in the same ownership as of April 1, 1984, shall not be reduced in size so as to be nonconforming with the requirements of this UDO. 
B.  Exemption. In areas subdivided prior to April 1, 1984, and the resulting lots that were not substandard at the time of the subdivision, the lots that were legally created may be subdivided to allow the sale of a principal structure. The subdivision may occur even if the resulting lots are not consistent with the property development regulations of this UDO. 
Section 11.1.6. - Illegal Nonconformities. 
A nonconformity that was illegal prior to the effective date of these land development regulations shall remain an illegal nonconforming use. 
ARTICLE 2. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Section 11.2.1. - Nonconforming Uses. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the lawful use of any use, building, structure or land existing as of the effective date of these land development regulations or subsequent amendment, may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of these regulations. 
Section 11.2.2. - Termination of Nonconforming Uses. 
If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months or the change of a nonconforming use to a more restrictive or conforming use occurs for any period of time, the nonconforming use shall be considered terminated and shall not be re-established. 
Section 11.2.3. - Change of Use. 
A.  Change to a Conforming Use. 
1.  Change Permitted. A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use, subject to applicable requirements of these land development regulations. 
2.  Reversion Prohibited. When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the use of the structure, building or land shall not thereafter be changed into a nonconforming use or a less restricted nonconforming use. 
B.  Change to Another Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use of an equal or more restricted classification provided that no structural change, enlargement, extension or reconstruction is made. 
Section 11.2.4. - Reconstruction, Expansion or Extension. 
An existing building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered except as provided below. 
A.  Restoration. Any building devoted to a nonconforming use that is damaged to an extent that is less than 50 percent of the value of the improvements, may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before. 
1.  Limits of Reconstruction. 
(A)  Reconstruction Permitted. The reconstruction shall not exceed the location and dimension of the existing structure, including bulk, height, setbacks and number of square feet that existed prior to the damage. 
(B)  Time for Compliance. The restoration must be completed within 12 months from the date of the damage, or the use of such building, structure, or land as a legal nonconforming use shall thereafter be terminated. 
B.  Restoration Prohibited. Any building devoted to a nonconforming use that is damaged to an extent that is equal to or greater 50 percent of the value of the improvements shall not be restored, reconstructed, or used as before. 
C.  Extension. 
1.  Extension Prohibited. Unless otherwise provided herein, a nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged throughout a building. 
2.  Exception. A single-family or two-family dwelling that is located on an individual lot within a RMD, RMF1, RMF2, or RO zoning district may be extended or enlarged. 
(A)  The extension shall comply with the property development regulations of the RMF2 zoning district. 
(B)  The extension shall not increase the number dwelling units contained within such residential buildings. 
ARTICLE 3. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 

Section 11.3.1. - Unsafe Structures. 
Any nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority shall not be restored to a standard condition, except in conformance with the requirements of this Article. 
Section 11.3.2. - Reconstruction, Expansion or Extension. 
A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered except as provided below. 
A.  Reconstruction or Restoration. A nonconforming structure that is damaged to an extent that is less than 50 percent of the value of the improvements may be reconstructed or restored. 
1.  Limits of Reconstruction. 
(A)  Reconstruction Permitted. The reconstruction shall not exceed the location and dimension of the existing structure, including bulk, height, setbacks and number of square feet that existed prior to the damage. 
(B)  Time for Compliance. The restoration must be completed within two years from the date of the damage, or the use of such building, structure, or land as a legal nonconforming use shall thereafter be terminated. 
B.  Reconstruction or Restoration Prohibited. 
1.  Nonconforming Uses. Any building devoted to a nonconforming use that is damaged to an extent equal to or greater 50 percent of the value of the improvements shall not be reconstructed or restored unless the new construction complies with the requirements of these land development regulations. The nonconforming use that occupied the prior structure may be re-established, subject to all other requirements of this Article. 
2.  Conforming Uses. The use of any nonconforming structure that is damaged to an extent equal to or greater 50 percent of the value of the improvements shall not be reconstructed or restored unless the new construction complies with the requirements of these land development regulations. 
Section 11.3.3. - Alterations and Repairs. 
A.  Nonresidential Structures. 
1.  Alterations and Repairs. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be structurally altered or repaired during its life to an extent that such cumulative alterations and repairs exceed 25 percent of the value of all improvements, unless the use of structure is changed to a conforming use. 
2.  Expansion of Use Prohibited. Normal maintenance, repairs and incidental alteration of a conforming structure containing a nonconforming use are permitted, provided that repairs and alterations do not extend the number of square feet occupied by the nonconforming use. 
B.  Residential Structures. A nonconforming structure containing a residential use may be altered to improve interior livability, provided that an alteration shall not be made that increases the nonconformity with regard to the number of dwelling units, the bulk or number of square feet of the structure, or applicable property development regulations. 
Section 11.3.4. - Prior Approval. 
On the effective date of this Article, adoption of this Article shall not require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a structure complying with existing laws, subject to the standards listed below. 
A.  Permit Granted. A building permit for structure has been granted. 
B.  Completion. The structure shall be completed, according to such plans as filed, within six months from the effective date of this Article. 
Section 11.3.5. - Administrative Appeals. 
Appeal from a decision relating to these land development regulations by an administrative official may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided herein. 
Chapter 12 - Administration and Enforcement 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 12 

[Section 12.1.1. - Purpose of Chapter 12] 
This Article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this UDO, including the responsibilities and procedures of the Director of Planning, the Director of Engineering, the City Arborist, and the Director of Inspections and Codes in carrying out enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
ARTICLE 2. - SCHEDULES AND FEES 

[Section 12.2.1. - Schedules and Fees.] 
From time to time, the City Council may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Development Code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review and hearing processes required by this Development Code. 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE ROLES 

Section 12.3.1. - Director of Planning. 
A.  Responsibilities. The Director of Planning, or the Director's designee, is responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for zoning, special exception use approval, text amendments to these this UDO, and appeals from this Code filed with the City. The Director, or the Director's designee, serves as the Secretary to the Planning Advisory Commission. 
B.  Subdivisions and Development Rights. The Director, or the Director's designee, shall be responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for the design layout of subdivisions and development projects. 
C.  Enforcement. As the agent for all authorizations related to the use land and buildings, the Director, or the Director's designee, shall be responsible for enforcement of all requirements and restrictions of this UDO related to the design layout of subdivisions and development projects. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 12.3.2. - Engineering Director. 
A.  Responsibilities. The Engineering Director, or the Director's designee, is responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for permits related to land disturbing activity, including the clearing and grading of property and protection from soil erosion and sedimentation, and the construction of streets and stormwater drainage facilities. 
B.  Enforcement. As the issuing agent for all permits related to land development, the Engineering Director, or the Director's designee, is responsible for enforcement of all requirements and restrictions of these this UDO related to the clearing and grading of subdivisions and development projects, and the construction of streets and stormwater drainage facilities and their continued maintenance and operation. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 12.3.3. - City Arborist. 
See Chapter 4. 
Section 12.3.4. - Director of Inspections and Code. 
A.  Responsibilities. The Director or the Director's designee, shall be responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for the construction of buildings and structures, and the use and occupancy of buildings, structures and lands within the Columbus Consolidated Government jurisdiction. 
B.  Enforcement. As the issuing agent for all permits and authorizations related to buildings and structures, the Director or the Director's designee, shall be responsible for enforcement of all requirements and restrictions of this UDO related to the construction of buildings and structures and the use or occupancy of land and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
ARTICLE 4. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 12.4.1. - Enforcement Officers. 
A.  Authority. 
1.  Investigations. The Director of Planning, the Director of Engineering, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement and the City Arborist, independently and separately, shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of these this UDO under their respective administrative roles. 
2.  Entry onto Property. Each Enforcement Officer and their designees shall have the authority to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
B.  Entry for Purposes of Inspection. The entry or access to any property by an authorized representative or agent of the City, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the Soil and Water Conservation District, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division shall not be refused by any person for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Section 12.4.2. - Land Development Activities. 
A.  Periodic Inspections. 
1.  The Department of Engineering shall periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
2.  The Department of Engineering shall have the power to conduct such investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this UDO, and for this purpose to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Department of Engineering, the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the Soil and Water Conservation District or the EPD, who requests entry for purpose of inspection, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
4.  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
B.  Notice of Noncompliance. When, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activity, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with development permit conditions, or with any other provisions relating to land development activities of this UDO, one or more of the following actions may be taken. 
1.  A written notice to comply shall be served upon that person not in compliance. The notice shall state the nature of the noncompliance, the measure to be taken or the results required and the time allowed for compliance. 
2.  If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, they may be deemed in violation. 
C.  Conformance with Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. The Columbus Consolidated Government will amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
D.  Certification Requirements. 
1.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
3.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Section 12.4.3. - Land Use and Other Provisions. 
A.  Inspection. If the Director of Planning, the Director of Inspections and Codes, the Director of Engineering, or the City Arborist finds that a provision of this UDO is being violated relating to the use or occupancy of land or structures, lot standards, landscaping, buffers, tree preservation and replacement, parking, signage or any other standard or provision, other than land disturbing activities as may be authorized by a development permit, or relating to a condition of approval established in connection with a grant of variance or zoning change, the appropriate Enforcement Officer shall notify the person responsible for such violation in writing. 
B.  Stop Work Order. A notice of violation may consist of an order to cease and desist the violation. 
C.  Contents of Notice. The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation and order the action necessary to correct it. Upon continuing noncompliance, or initially in the case of an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the Enforcement Officer shall have authority to prosecute violations in court. 
D.  Cease and Desist Orders. The Enforcement Officer shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal or relocation of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of these this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
ARTICLE 5. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

Section 12.5.1. - Violation a Misdemeanor. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this UDO without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit and other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of Columbus-Muscogee County. 
A.  Stop-Work Orders. 
1.  First and Second Violations. For the first and second violation of the provisions of a development permit, the Engineering Director shall issue a written warning to the violator. 
(A)  Correction of Violation. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Engineering Director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order. 
(B)  Contents of Order. The order shall require that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining a development permit, the Engineering Director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
2.  Third and Subsequent Violations. For a third and each subsequent violation, the Engineering Director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
3.  Effective Date of Stop Work Order. All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  Issuance of Stop Work Order. When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or signification amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the EPD Director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the EPD Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
B.  Bond Forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of the Required Performance Surety Section of Chapter 10 of this UDO. The Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
C.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is: 
1.  Not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
2.  Is in violation of permit conditions; or 
3.  Is in violation of any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations adopted or promulgated pursuant to this chapter; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days after receipt by the Department of Engineering of written notice of intent to appeal. Such appeal, however, shall not relieve that person from the obligation to provide all necessary measures to prevent soil erosion and other damage during the interval for the appeal. 
D.  Judicial Review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Department of Engineering, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Muscogee County. 
Section 12.5.2. - Failure to Obtain a Development Permit. 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a development permit as prescribed in these this UDO without first obtaining said development permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. 
Section 12.5.3. - Violation of Soil Erosion or Sedimentation Provisions. 
Any violation of the provisions of these development regulations adopted pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, shall be subject to the penalties or fines listed below. 
A.  Civil Monetary Penalties. Soil erosion or sedimentation violations shall be subject to a civil penalty assessed and collected by the City. 
1.  Maximum Penalty. 
(A)  Any person who violates any provisions of this UDO adopted pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Engineering Director issued as provided in this UDO shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. 
(B)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this UDO, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts or recorder's court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate's court, recorder's court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations under this Section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
2.  Separate Offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 12.5.4. - Violation of Other Provisions. 
A.  Maximum Civil Penalty. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this Code, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Code or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director of Planning, the Director of Inspections and Codes, the Director of Engineering, or the City Arborist issued as provided in these this UDO shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. 
2.  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this UDO, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts or recorder's court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate's court, recorder's court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations under this Section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
B.  Separate Offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09) 
Section 12.5.5. - Additional Remedies. 
Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
ARTICLE 6. - LIABILITY 

Section 12.6.1. - Relief Not Granted. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of these this UDO, nor the issuance of a permit, nor the compliance with provisions of these this UDO, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City for damage to any person or property. 
Section 12.6.2. - Injuries Resulting from Development Permits. 
The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Code or the terms of the development permit. 
Section 12.6.3. - Violations Prohibited. 
No provision of this Code shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined by said Acts. 
Section 12.6.4. - Regulations, Inspections and Permits Declared Remedial. 
These regulations and all inspections conducted and permits issued there under are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
A.  Quality Control Not Included in Regulations. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of these regulations except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
B.  Warranty not Created. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of these regulations shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. 
C.  Liability for Damages Not Created. Neither the City Council, any City Official, nor any City employee shall be liable for damages to any entity for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
ARTICLE 7. - RIGHT TO IMPOSE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Section 12.7.1. - Authority. 
If a development standard was inadvertently omitted from the UDO or these amendments thereto, the Department of Planning and the Columbus Council reserve the right to impose such development standards as it existed prior to the effective date of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Chapter 13 - DEFINITIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - DEFINED TERMS 

Section 13.1.1. - Definitions. 
Unless another definition is clearly provided within the text of this document, the definitions listed below shall apply in the use of these regulations. All other words in this UDO shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
Abandon means to discontinue a use for more than a specified period of time or to vacate a right-of-way, easement, or other interest in real property. 
Accessory use. See "Use, accessory." 
Accidental Discharge means a discharge prohibited that occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to the occurrence. 
Acre means land or water, or combination thereof, containing 43,560 square feet. 
Addition to an Existing Building means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. 
Adult entertainment establishment means a business in which, as the major activity, customers congregate primarily for the purpose of viewing or associating with employees who display anatomical areas designed to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification: human genitals, the immediate public region, or pubic hair; buttocks to the extent of exposing the immediate anal area; female breasts to points below the nipples; male genitals in a state of erection, even if covered with opaque clothing; all of the above anatomical areas when covered only by transparent or diaphanous clothing. 
Adult media shop or adult bookstore means an establishment that rents or sells books, magazines, videotapes, slides, movies or other media that is consistent with any of the three tests listed below. 
(1)  More than 40 percent of the gross floor area is devoted to materials depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Section. 
(2)  More than 40 percent of the stock in trade consists of materials depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Section. 
(3)  The establishment advertises or holds itself out in any forum as XXX, adult or as a sex shop or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business other than an adult motion picture theatre or adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult motion picture theater means a place where motion pictures are shown or a section, department, or part of any business set aside for the showing of motion pictures, which has as its principal purpose the offering for viewing to adults of motion pictures which have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Section. 
Advertise means to inform, to notify, to announce, to attract public attention by emphasizing desirable qualities in order to arouse a desire to purchase or invest. 
Agriculture, limited means non-intensive agricultural activities that may be commercial in nature, and include such activities as apiculture, forestry, groves, private and commercial equestrian activities, private and commercial kennels, produce stands, veterinary offices, and wholesale greenhouses and nurseries. 
Airport elevation means the highest point of the airport's useable runway system measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL). 
Airport hazard means a structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace, required for the normal operation of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport or is otherwise hazardous to such operation of aircraft. 
Airport means the Columbus Metropolitan Airport. 
Airport zones means the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones. These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined in the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77. The surfaces are also referred to as "imaginary surfaces." 
Airport, general means a public or private facility that is utilized for the landing and take-off of military, commercial or private aircraft, including all necessary facilities for maintenance, parking, repair and storage of airplanes; and facilities associated with commercial airline passengers. 
Alley means a public or private minor right-of-way used primarily for service and vehicular access to the back or side of a property. 
Alteration means, for purposes related to historic preservation, any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure. 
Alteration means any change, addition, improvement, or modification to an existing structure. 
Ambulance service means emergency medical care and transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles. 
Amusement park means commercially operated a building or facility with various devices for entertainment, booths for the sale of food and drinks, and similar types of amusement activities. 
Amusement, indoor means an establishment which offers commercial recreational activities in an enclosed structure, including billiards parlors, bingo parlors and bowling alleys, and, but excluding movie theaters, health and fitness facilities, and indoor gun clubs or facilities. 
Amusement, outdoor means an establishment which offers commercial recreational activities where all or part of such activities occur outdoors, including archery ranges, athletic fields, batting cages, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, but excluding go-cart tracks, gun clubs, and jet skiing. 
Antenna means any device or combination of devices, whether rods, panels or dishes, designed to receive or transmit radio frequency signals for amateur radio or personal wireless services, including but not limited to cellular telephone, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), private mobile radio (PMR) and paging. 
Antique shop means an establishment engaged in the sale of items, which are in demand and have a value due to being rare, old, historic, of a collectible nature, or an expectation of increasing value. Antiques include art objects, coins, decorative objects, house wares, glassware, jewelry, stamps and similar items at least 100 years old. 
Apiculture means the raising and caring of bees. 
Applicant means any individual, corporation or person or their authorized representative applying for any development approval, permit or other form of approval required by the UDO. 
Application means a petition for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of a property under the requirements of this UDO. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Arborist means one who is versed in the art of arboriculture, including tree surgery, the prevention and cure of tree diseases and the control of insect pests. 
Area of Shallow Flooding means designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, or where a clearly deemed channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard means the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be designated by the local community. 
Arena, coliseum, fairground and stadium mean an open or enclosed area, including an auditorium or gymnasium used for public sports, entertainment and similar public purposes or gatherings. 
Arterial Street. See "Street, arterial." 
Artisan or crafter means an individual engaged in the production of handmade goods, art, jewelry, and similar items, including but not limited to artists, candle and soap makers, caners, painters, photographers, potters, quilters, sculptors, stained glass makers, weavers and woodworkers. 
Arts and crafts sales means the sale of products made by an artisan or crafter. 
Assembly hall means a facility that is utilized for civic, education, political, religious or social purposes, and may include accessory kitchen and related facilities. 
Assisted living facility (ALF) means any facility which offers residence, services, meals, and skilled care to the elderly, and may include one or more of the following types of services: (1) independent living; (2) assisted living; and (3) skilled nursing care. 
Athletic courts means lighted or unlighted athletic facilities, including tennis, basketball, handball, and racquetball. 
Attached Wireless Communication Facility is an antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the building or structure. 
Auto/truck broker means a person who, for a commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain of money or other thing of value, negotiates or attempts to negotiate the sale of a motor vehicle on behalf of another. Such term shall not mean any person engaged in the solicitation, negotiation, or advertising of the sale of used motor vehicles or any owner of real property who allows the display of used motor vehicles on such property if the sale of such vehicles is made by a used car dealer or a financial institution. 
Auto/truck fleet maintenance shops and garages means an establishment engaged in the repair, maintenance, service, storage, and general upkeep of fleet vehicles. 
Auto/truck paint and body shop means a building used for painting, repainting, or retouching, or major repairs and adjustments of motor vehicles. 
Auto/truck rental means an establishment engaged in the short- or long-term rental or leasing of autos, trucks, vans and similar vehicular equipment. 
Auto/truck repair, major means an establishment engaged in the installation, repair and maintenance of vehicle engines, including electrical systems; fuel systems; general engine repair, rebuilding and replacement; mufflers and exhaust systems; transmissions and drive trains; vehicle reconditioning; and similar activities that involve the repair, overhaul, removal, adjustment, replacement, assembly or disassembly of parts of any motor vehicle. 
Auto/truck repair, minor means an establishment engaged in the installation, maintenance and repair of air conditioning systems, audio systems, brakes, cooling systems, electrical systems, exhaust systems, fuel systems, oil and fluid changes, shock absorbers, tune-ups, and wheel alignment and balancing for automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles. 
Auto/truck sales, new and used means an establishment engaged in the on-premises lease, rental, retail sale, or wholesale sale, of new or used motor vehicles or equipment, with or without incidental service, automobile repair, and body repair and paint shops. 
Auto/truck service station means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of gasoline and diesel products, auto parts and accessories, and tires sales and installation; auto cleaning and detailing; and minor vehicle repair. 
Auto/truck tire sales and installation means an establishment that is engaged in the sales, installation, repair and maintenance of tires and accessories, and other minor repair services, including the sales, installation, repair or maintenance of the following: front end alignment; wheel balancing and similar tasks; batteries; shock absorbers and struts; oil and fluid changes; brake repair and replacement; and mufflers and tail pipes for automobiles, trucks, sport utility vehicles, and similar vehicles. 
Auto/truck upholstery shop means an establishment engaged in the repair and replacement of upholstery to automobiles and motor vehicles. 
Auto/truck wash and detail facility means an establishment that provides washing, waxing, and cleaning the interior of an automobile or motor vehicle. 
Auto/vehicle/truck storage and maintenance facility means a facility engaged in the repair, maintenance or long-term storage of auto vehicles. 
Bank and financial institution means an institution that is open to the general public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities. 
Banner means any sign having the characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for backing. 
Banquet facility means an establishment the [that] provides to the general public, on a fee basis, a building for banquets, meals, parties, receptions and similar group events, including accessory kitchen facilities. 
Bar and lounge means an establishment that is devoted primarily to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year flood). 
Basement means a portion of a building partly underground or below the ground floor having a least one-half of its height above average grade. 
Beautification Plan Tree is any tree or shrub planted in any one of the following circumstances: (a) as part of the Columbus Georgia Beautification Plan which was established by Resolution No. 576-08, as the same may be amended by future Councils (b) in the State right-of-way pursuant to a DOT Special Encroachment permit or with the permission of GDOT;(c) pursuant to a landscape plan which is part of a streetscape beautification program approval by the Columbus Consolidated Government and funded by governmental or private funding or (d) any planting done by or with the permission or acquiescence of the consolidated government on right-of-way of a city street or state highway. 
Bed and breakfast or bed and breakfast inn means an establishment consisting of one or more buildings providing lodging, limited meals, and meeting and conference facilities for a fee. 
Bed and breakfast homestay means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling providing lodging and limited meals for a fee. 
Berm means a mound of earth between two and six feet high used to buffer or screen a land use. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Beverage production and bottling means an establishment engaged in one or more of the following: processing, production, bottling, sales, or distribution of beverages. 
Billboard means a sign with an area of 300 square feet or greater, which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. A billboard may include a multiple message sign that means a sign, display, or device that changes the message or copy on the sign electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
Board of Historic and Architectural Review is a seven-member historical preservation commission established by the Columbus City Council in accordance Georgia Code 2-6102. 
Boarding or rooming house means, in the case of boarding house, a dwelling in which more than two persons are lodged and served meals on a continuing basis for compensation; and in the case of a rooming house, a dwelling in which more than two persons are lodged without meals on a continuing basis for compensation. 
Boat, trailer and marine sales means the sales, service and repair of new and used boats, boat trailers, marine hardware and related products. 
Boat storage, wet or dry means an enclosed, partially enclosed or open facility utilized for the wet or dry storage of boats. 
Bona fide agricultural purpose means a good faith commercial or domestic agricultural use of the land, any such determination of which shall be based upon, but not limited solely to, the following factors: 
(1)  The length of time the land will be so utilized; 
(2)  The productivity of land in its present use; 
(3)  The relationship of the property to the comprehensive zoning plan; and 
(4)  The current zoning classification of such lands as delineated on the official zoning map. 
Breakaway Wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Buffer means land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance. See also "stream buffer" and "zoning buffer." 
Building Code means the technical codes adopted or adopted as amended by the City under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act. 
Building and construction trades office and shop means an establishment engaged in providing building and construction services, including air conditioning and heating, carpenters, contractors, electricians, masons, plumbers, roofers, and similar services. 
Building face or frontage means the length of the single front building elevation in which the primary entrance to the business is located. If more than one business is located in a single building then such length shall be limited to that portion which is occupied by each individual business. 
Building height means, as applicable, the vertical distance from the grade to: (1) the highest point of a flat roof; or (2) the deck line of a mansard roof; or (3) the average height between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof; or (4) the average height between high and low points for a shed roof. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. 
Building Official means the director of inspections and code enforcement of Columbus, Georgia or his designated representatives. 
Building supplies, retail means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of building and construction supplies, materials and products, including: appliances, building materials, doors and windows, electrical supplies, hand and power tools, hardware, home improvement items, kitchen cabinets, lumber, paint, plumbing supplies, and similar items. 
Building supplies, wholesale means an establishment engaged in receiving and storage of bulk quantities of building and construction supplies and materials, and distribution and delivery of such materials to other wholesale or retail establishments. Building and construction materials include but are not limited to the following: appliances, building materials, doors and windows, electrical supplies, hand and power tools, hardware, home improvement items, kitchen cabinets, lumber, paint, plumbing supplies, and similar items. 
Building, accessory means detached subordinate building or portion thereof, the use of which is incidental to and customary in connection with the main building or use and which is located on the same lot with such main building or use. 
Bulk storage, flammable means a facility designed for the receipt, storage, sale and distribution of flammable, corrosive, explosive or similar hazardous materials. 
Bulk storage, nonflammable means a facility designed for the receipt, storage, sale and distribution of nonflammable, noncorrosive, nonexplosive or similar nonhazardous materials. 
Bus and railway passenger station means a location where commercial transportation for passengers, including bus, train or mass transit service arrives and departs on a scheduled basis. 
Caliper means the diameter or thickness of the truck of a nursery-grown tree as measured at six inches above the top of the root mass. 
Carport means structure open on three sides or four sides, designed to provide shelter for one or more motor vehicles. 
Cemetery means property used for interring the dead, and may include a chapel, columbarium crematorium, or mausoleum. 
Central business district (CBD) means areas zoned UPT and CRD by the Official Zoning Map. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document approving a proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district. 
Check cashing office means an establishment that cashes payroll, personal and other checks for the general public for a fee, and may include ancillary services such as wire transfer of money, issuance of cashier's checks and related services. 
Child or children means, for the purposes of day care requirements of this UDO, any individual that is less than 17 years of age. 
Chipmill means permanent or mobile equipment that chips, shreds, mulches or otherwise cuts trees, branches and vegetation for disposal. 
City Arborist means the Manager of the Landscape and Forestry Division or designee. 
City Code means all ordinances, laws and regulations adopted by the Council of Columbus. 
City Engineer means the City Engineer or designee. 
City Engineer means the duly designated Director of the Department of Engineering of Columbus, Georgia, licensed and registered in Georgia to perform the duties of Engineer, as herein specified or duly authorized agent. 
City Land Planner means the individual employed within the Planning Department charged with reviewing subdivision plats and site plans. 
City or City of Columbus means the Consolidated Columbus Government, Georgia, including the City of Columbus and Muscogee County. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended. 
Clearing means the removal and proper disposal of exposed objectionable matter from an area, and may include but is not limited to trees, roots, grass, underbrush, rubble, any type of structures, etc. 
Clinic and hospital, veterinary means a facility for diagnosis, care and treatment of animals on an outpatient basis. 
Clinic, medical or dental means a facility for diagnosis, care and treatment of outpatients. 
Club or lodge, membership means a building or facility owned and operated on a membership basis for fraternal, religious, social or recreational purposes. 
Club or lodge, not for profit means a building or facility operated on a nonprofit basis for cultural, educational, fraternal, recreational, religious and/or recreational purposes. 
Clubhouse means a not for profit facility housing an organization that is operated for athletic, civic, educational, fraternal, intellectual, recreational or social purposes. Clubhouse also means a facility that is operated as part of golf club, yacht club or similar activity. Clubhouse also means a facility operated as a common feature, such as a swimming pool or tennis court in a subdivision, development, or multifamily project. 
Code means the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) of the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
Cold storage and distribution means a facility designed for the receipt, storage, sale and distribution of foodstuffs and perishable goods that must remain frozen or refrigerated. 
Columbarium means a structure that is used for the inurnment of human remains. 
Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Common area means an area, including all improvements, designed for the use and enjoyment of residents in or users of a residential or nonresidential structure. 
Community facilities means public or private facilities such as assembly halls, union halls, conference halls and centers, stadiums or arenas, or auditoriums including accessory office or administrative space; nonprofit clubs and lodges; art galleries, museums, libraries, and theaters for live performances or films, videos, or other electronic medium; golf courses and clubhouses, excluding miniature golf; and public uses. 
Compatibility means land uses that are congruous, similar, and in harmony with one another inasmuch as they do not create or foster undesirable health, safety, or aesthetic effects arising from direct association of dissimilar, contradictory, incongruous, or discordant activities, including but not limited to the impacts of intensity of use, traffic, hours of operation, aesthetics, noise, vibration, smoke, hazardous odors, radiation, function, and other land use conditions. 
Computer assembly means a facility that is engaged in the assembly of computers and computer-related equipment, electronic equipment and similar equipment from parts already manufactured. 
Concealed support structure means any freestanding structure constructed for the primary purpose of supporting one or more antennae but designed to resemble an architectural or natural feature of the specific environment, concealing or camouflaging the presence of the antennae. The term includes but is not limited to clock towers, campaniles, water towers, silos, light poles, flagpoles, and artificial trees. 
Concrete batching and asphalt plant means a plant that is engaged in the production, distribution and sale of concrete or asphalt from materials that are delivered to the plant site. 
Condition of Zoning Approval means a requirement adopted by the City Council at the time of approval of a zoning change, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the zoning change and to further the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Consignment Shop means a retail establishment where the operator receives goods and merchandise, for display and sale, from another individual or party and will pay that individual or party only when the goods or merchandise are sold. 
Construction or demolition debris means nonbiodegradeable waste resulting from road building; construction, demolition, remodeling or repair of structures; and similar improvements. 
Contractor's storage yard and office means a facility or area for the storage of materials, equipment, and commercial vehicles utilized by building and construction contractors, craftsmen and tradesmen, and may include accessory offices related to such activities. 
Convalescent or nursing facility means an establishment providing services to the elderly, illness, or infirm, including lodging, meals and custodial care or nursing care. 
Convenience store, no gas sales means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of convenience items, pre-packaged foods, beverages, tobacco and other foodstuffs needed on a regular basis, excluding the retail sale of gasoline and diesel fuels. 
Convenience store, with gas sales means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of convenience items, pre-packaged foods, beverages, tobacco and other foodstuffs needed on a regular basis, including the retail sale of gasoline and diesel fuels. 
Convent, monastery or seminary means a facility that is used for residential and academic purposes by a religious institution. 
Convention, civic or trade center means a building or facility designed for the assembly of persons and used for one or more of the following: conference, convention, display of goods and products, exhibitions, entertainment, recreation and sports. 
Cooling Water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance devise or apparatus. 
Copy means the wording or pictorial graphics on a sign surface that are attached either in permanent or removable form. 
Correctional facility means a federal, state, county or municipal facility for the accommodation of persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence following adjudication. 
Council or City Council means the Council of Columbus. 
County means Muscogee County, Georgia. 
Crematorium means a structure utilized for the cremation of human remains. 
Critical establishment period means the first two years after a tree is planted. 
Critical root zone means an area on the ground around a tree that is within the drip line of a tree and/or 1.5 times DBH in feet radius. 
Cultural Facility means a public, private, or not for profit facility that provides for the display, performance, or enjoyment of heritage, history, arts, or nature. This use includes but is not limited to: museums, arts performances venues, cultural centers, interpretive sites, libraries, museums, or botanical gardens, but does not include commercially-operated theaters. 
Cutoff or cutoff fixture, directional lighting or luminaire means an outdoor light fixture that provides a cutoff or shielding of emitted light to minimize effect on adjacent property. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Cutting means (1) for the purpose of tree protection, the detaching or separating of any limb, branch, or root from a tree; for the purpose of erosion control, the removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Data processing means an establishment engaged in the processing of data, information and similar records via electronic and related methods. 
Day care facility means an establishment providing day care for a period of less than 24 hours. 
Day care means the for-profit or not-for-profit supervision and care, excluding medical care, of nonresidential children or elderly adults for a fee for a period of less than 24 hours. 
Day Care, Type I (Day care, family home) means an establishment that provides day care for 5 or 6 children or adults within a residential dwelling. 
Day Care, Type II (Day care, group home) means an establishment that provides day care for 7 to 18 children or adults. 
Day Care, Type III (Day care center) means an establishment that provides day care for 19 or more children or adults. 
Day labor employment office means an establishment providing temporary or permanent recruitment services for individuals seeking manual labor employment. 
Day means, except as otherwise provided in this Unified Development Ordinance, a business day and shall not include weekends or holidays of the City. 
Dead tree means a tree that does not contain any live tissue, i.e., green leaves or live limbs. 
Deciduous means a plant with foliage that drops or dies at the end of a growing season. 
Decorative elements/deluxes/ornamentation means a sign having the characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. To include pennants, streamers, garland, garnish, rotating and/or fluttering devices designated to attract attention. This does not include banners. 
Decorative lighting means lighting fixtures of limited height and illumination provided primarily to enhance areas with a public use or pedestrian orientation, or to highlight key architectural elements, landscaping, fountains and similar design elements of a building or project. 
Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in significant part, of a building, structure, site or object, and includes the removal of building, structure or object from its site or the removal or destruction of the facade or surface. 
Density factor means, relating to tree preservation and replacement, a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage of a site. 
Density means the number of dwelling units allowed based upon gross acreage of a site. 
Department means, unless otherwise clearly indicated, the Planning Department, successor agency or as designated by the City Manager. 
Design guidelines means a manual showing design features and examples of appropriate treatment of them that will preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or district. 
Design Professional means a person registered in the State of Georgia as a Landscape Architect or Professional Engineer. 
Designation means a decision by the Council of Columbus to designate such property as a "historic property" or as a "historic district". 
Development permit means an application to use, alter, construct upon, or otherwise change the use of land, and includes any applications for comprehensive plan future land use map change, rezoning, special exception use, variance, temporary use or special event, building permit, clearing or grading permit, or other permit or approval that allows the alteration of land or a structure. 
Development permit means the authorization necessary to begin a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. See also "site development permit." 
DHR means the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Diameter at Breast Height means the standard measure of tree size for trees existing on a site. The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground, and if a tree splits into multiple trunks below that point, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Diameter, tree means the diameter of a tree measured as follows: 
(1)  For existing preserved trees, at a point four and one-half feet above the ground; 
(2)  For new replaced trees, at a point six inches above ground; and 
(3)  For multiple trunk trees, as provided in the measure of diameter at breast height. 
Director means, unless otherwise clearly identified, the Director of the Planning Department or designee, successor title or as designated by the City Manager. 
Disabled means, for the purposes of regulating personal care facilities, a person with (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits the exercise of one or more major life activities and the ability to live independently; (2) a person with a record of such impairment; or (3) a person regarding as experiencing such impairment. This definition does not include a person [who] is undergoing treatment for current or former use of addictive or controlled substances; considered a threat to the health, safety and welfare of other persons; placed in a work release center for current or former convicts; placed in an alternative incarceration or correctional facility; or placed in a juvenile work release, halfway house, or other alternative incarceration or correctional facility. 
Dispatch agency or office means an establishment that provides off-site services to households and businesses using telephonic or electronic communication, including such services as janitorial, limousine, pest control, and taxi. 
Distribution and warehousing means a facility engaged in the wholesale receipt, storage and distribution of equipment, manufactured products, parts, processed foods, supplies and related items. 
DNR means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Dormitory, fraternity or sorority residence means a residential structure for students attending a public or private college, school, or university. 
Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground. 
Drive-in facility means an establishment designed and operated to allow customers to receive goods or services while remaining in their vehicles, including a drive-through, drive-up, or similar facility, with all parking located off a public street or right-of-way. 
Drive-through menu board means an outdoor menu for drive-in windows. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Dry cleaning and laundry plant means a plant engaged in the receipt, dry cleaning, pressing or laundering, and delivery of fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, and similar items, utilizing commonly accepted professional practices and materials. 
Dry cleaning and laundry station means a facility that provides service for the pickup or drop-off of items to be laundered or dry cleaned, but where laundry and dry cleaning do not occur onsite. 
Dry cleaning and laundry, general means an establishment that provides onsite drying, dry cleaning, washing and laundry services. 
Dwelling unit means any structure, or part thereof, that is designed to be occupied as living quarters by a single-family, containing separate bathing, kitchen, and sanitary, and sleeping facilities. 
Dwelling, accessory means a secondary, subordinate dwelling that is attached to or detached from and located on the same lot as the principal structure. 
Dwelling, loft means a residential dwelling that is located above the ground floor of a multistory nonresidential building. 
Dwelling, manufactured means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under The National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Dwelling, mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Dwelling, multifamily means a building or buildings containing separate bathing, kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping facilities designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other as a separate housekeeping unit. 
Dwelling, second floor means a residential dwelling that is located above the ground floor of a two story nonresidential building. 
Dwelling, single-family detached means an unattached building, containing separate bathing, kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping facilities designed to be occupied by not more than one family, not including manufactured and mobile homes. 
Dwelling, townhouse means two or more attached single-family dwellings separated from one another by impermeable or opaque party walls and sharing a common roof structure that may extend from one dwelling to another. 
Dwelling, duplex means a building containing separate bathing, kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping facilities designed to be occupied by not more than two families living independently of each other as a separate housekeeping unit. 
Dwelling, zero lot line means a building containing separate bathing, kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping facilities designed to be occupied by not more than one family, with the building located in such a manner that one or more sides of the building directly on a lot line. 
Elderly adult means an adult at least 62 years of age. 
Elevated Building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest elevated area elevated above the ground level by means of fill; solid foundation perimeter walls; pilings, columns, posts and piers, shear walls; or breakaway walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the building during a base flood event. 
Emergency care clinic means a facility, other than a hospital or medical clinic, which provides non-surgical emergency or ambulatory medical care on the basis of extended business hours during the day. 
Employee residence means an accessory dwelling utilized by an employee working in the principal residential structure or the resident thereof. 
Employment agency means an establishment providing employee recruitment services on a full time, part time, or temporary basis for professional, management, executive, administrative, and technical positions, but excluding day labor and labor pool offices for manual labor. 
EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Equestrian, commercial means barn, stable or similar structure that offers such services as horse livery, practice fields, stalls and riding instruction for a fee. 
Equestrian, private means a barn, stable or similar structure that is utilized for horses owned, trained, and ridden by the residents. 
Equipment sales, service and rental means an establishment that sells, services and rents construction equipment, household goods such as chairs and tables, lawn equipment, tools, and similar items. 
Equipment storage, outdoors means a facility engaged in the short- or long-term outdoor storage of various types of equipment, including boats, campers, construction equipment and vehicles, farm equipment, recreational vehicles, trucks and similar types of equipment. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity and identifies all potential sources of pollution which may be expected to affect the quality of storm water discharges from the construction site or common development. 
Evergreen means a plant with foliage that remains green year-round. 
Exceptional Specimen Tree means any tree which upon application is determined by the Tree Board to be a unique and intrinsic value to the general public because of its size, age, historic association or ecological value or any tree designated a Georgia State Champion, United States Champion or World Champion by the American Forestry Association. The City Arborist shall keep a record of all specimen trees so designated and their location. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of flood damage prevention requirements, any structure for which the start of construction commenced before March 1, 1983. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Express or parcel delivery service means an establishment engaged in the delivery, receipt, and transmittal of documents, packages and parcels. 
Extended stay hotel means a hotel, motel or inn containing ten or more sleeping rooms used for temporary occupancy of transients and containing cooking facilities in more than 50 percent of the individual rooms. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, kind or textures of the building material and siding; the type and style of all windows, doors, porches, roofs, foundations, signs, landscaping, fencing and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Extermination service means an establishment engaged in providing residential and nonresidential insect, pest and vector control. 
Facade means the side of a building below the eaves. 
Facility means an area, building, lot, structure or other specific location in which one or more activities or uses occur. 
Family means any number of individuals, not necessarily related, living together as a single housekeeping unit with kitchen facilities on the premises. 
Farm equipment sales and service means an establishment engaged in the on-premises lease, rental, or retail sale of new or used farm equipment, with or without incidental service for minor repairs and maintenance. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Film and video studio means a studio engaged in the staging and production of film, motion picture, television, video, and related media. 
Final stabilization means all land disturbing activities at a site have been completed and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles, have been used. For the purposes of this definition, permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flag means any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. This includes official flags of states, counties, municipalities, foreign nations, nationally, or internationally recognized organizations and the official flag of any institution or business. 
Flea market means an outdoor or enclosed commercial activity, open to the general public that offers goods for sale. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: (1) overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2) unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floodplain, 100-year means, as provided in Chapter 5 of this Unified Development Ordinance, land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles or storage, or the floor area of an attic used exclusively for storage. 
Food processing means an establishment engaged in the receipt, processing, packaging, and distribution of foodstuffs for human consumption, including the following: beverage production and bottling plants; breweries and microbreweries; canneries; fresh food and produce cleaning, processing, packing, and shipping facilities; meat cutting and packaging plants; processed foods, including bread, cookies, nuts, and snacks; and other similar establishments. 
Forestry means the science, business and art of creating, conserving and managing forests on a continuous basis for both commodity and noncommodity purposes. 
Foster care home means a private home used by a child-placing agency which has been approved by the child-placing agency to provide 24-hour care, lodging, supervision and maintenance for no more than six children who are unrelated to the foster parent or parents as defined in O.C.G.A. §49-5-60 (10). 
Freeway means the highest type of arterial highway which has full control access giving preferential treatment to through traffic, and are typically multi-lane roadways with medians, grade separation at cross streets, ramp connections and frontage roadways for access to adjoining properties. 
Fruit and vegetable market means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of fresh flowers, fruit, juices, plants, vegetables, and processed food such as bread, jams, jellies, and related items for human consumption. 
Funeral home means an establishment that prepares humans for burial, and provides funeral-related activities such as management services, facilities for memorial services, and supplies such as caskets and urns. 
Furniture and home furnishing sales means a retail establishment engaged in the sale of accessories, furniture, rugs, and related items for furnishing homes and offices. 
Furniture repair and refinishing means an establishment that is engaged in the rebuilding, rehabilitation, renovation, repair and restoration of furniture, including antique furniture and furnishings. 
Garage, private means an attached or detached accessory residential building, including a carport, used for the parking or storage of automobiles operated by the occupants of the residence. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual means the most recent edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, first published August, 2001. 
Gift shop and antique shop means an establishment engaged in the sale of antiques, collectible items, gifts, greeting cards, souvenirs, and similar items. 
Golf course means a public or private outdoor recreational facility, providing for executive courses, nine hole courses, and regulation courses, including accessory uses such as club house, driving range, maintenance facilities, and restaurant or lounge. 
Grading means altering the shape of the ground surfaces to a predetermined condition, and this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grand opening means a promotional activity used by newly established businesses after occupancy to inform the public of their location and service available to the community. Grand opening does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. 
Green space means any area retained as permanently vegetated land. 
Greenhouse and nursery, retail means an establishment engaged in the sale of garden supplies, garden tools, plants, trees and related items to the public. 
Greenhouse and nursery, wholesale means an establishment engaged in the commercial cultivation or growing of plants, trees and other vegetation for sale or distribution to other wholesale or retail businesses. 
Grocery or food store means an establishment engaged in the sale of products for human consumption including but not limited to baked goods and breads; canned foods; dairy products, fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh fish, meat and poultry; personal hygiene; and related items. 
Groom's quarters means an accessory dwelling unit for an employee of a commercial or private equestrian use. 
Ground cover means grasses or other plants grown to keep soil from being blown or washed away. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Group foster home means a building or portion thereof that provides sleeping/lodging accommodations, whether operated for profit or not, for a total of more than six but 15 or fewer minor/juvenile persons not related by blood or adoption to the owner or operator on a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. Each location must be licensed by the state agency having jurisdiction. 
Grove means a stand of trees that produce citrus, fruits, nuts and similar edible or inedible products. 
Guest cottage means a secondary, subordinate dwelling that is attached to or detached from and located on the same lot as the principal structure. 
Half-street means a right-of-way dedicated for a new street by a developer along such developer's perimeter property line equal to only one-half of the total right-of-way width required by this Code. Dedication of a "half street" presumes future dedication of a corresponding amount of right-of-way from adjoining land in order to provide the total right-of-way required for a proposed street. The dedication of additional right-of-way along an existing street is not considered a "half-street." 
Hazardous waste disposal facility means a facility that is designed and operated to accept, process and dispose of products that are identified as hazardous waste or materials by federal, state or local agencies. 
Hazardous waste means debris, materials, products, refuse or waste that, due to chemical, biological or physical properties, cannot be disposed of in a routine or common fashion due to potential threats to the health, safety and welfare of humans, natural and environmental resources or habitats. Wastes include but are not limited to corrosives, explosives, flammable materials, irritants, medical wastes, oxidizers, pesticides, poisons or other materials identified by applicable federal, state, or local legislation. 
Health and fitness facility means an enclosed facility or spa providing equipment, classes, instruction and similar assistance for conducting a variety of activities designed to improve health and physical fitness, including, but not limited to, aerobic exercises and dancing, handball, racquetball, running, squash, weight lifting, swimming, weight reduction, and similar activities. Accessory uses, limited to patrons of the center, include babysitting, food and beverage service, and serving of alcoholic beverages. 
Health services means offices or establishments engaged in the provision of health services to the public, including clinics as part of a planned office center; clinic, medical and dental; hospitals, including nursing schools and dormitories for nurses, interns, and attendants; medical and dental offices, and health services not otherwise classified elsewhere. 
Height means that for the purposes of determining the height limits in all airport zones set forth in these regulations and shown on the airspace zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL) unless otherwise specified. 
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from grade of the adjacent street or highway to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. 
Helipad or helistop, accessory means an accessory area for the landing or take-off of helicopters or other aircraft capable of hovering. 
Heliport means a means an area for the landing or take-off of helicopters or other aircraft capable of hovering and for support services. 
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which: (1) have a special character or special historical or ethnic heritage or esthetic interest or value; (2) represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Columbus, state, or region; and (3) cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of Columbus. 
Historic property means a structure, site, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to Columbus, state, or region for one or more of the following reasons: (1) it is a landmark; or (2) it is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; or (3) it is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; or (4) it is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic, ethnic, or cultural significance to Columbus, state, or region; or (5) it is a site of natural or esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historic development and heritage of Columbus, state, or region. 
Holiday decoration means a temporary decoration for any special religious day or period. 
Home occupation means one or more commercial or occupational uses performed by a resident or family member of a residential dwelling unit located in a residential zoning district. 
Homeowners or property owners association means an association organized to own, maintain, and operate common facilities and to enhance and protect their common interests. 
Hospice means a facility used for the care and treatment of terminally ill persons. 
Hospital means a facility possessing all applicable licenses, and providing for the following: overnight care of one or more human patients; services to inpatients or outpatients; medical care to the sick and injured; and accessory facilities such as administrative offices, laboratories, outpatient services, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff facilities. 
Hotspot means a land use or activity on a site that produces higher concentrations of trace metals, hydrocarbons or other priority pollutants than are normally found in urban stormwater runoff. Examples of hotspots include gas stations, vehicle service and maintenance areas, salvage yards, material storage sites, garbage transfer facilities, and commercial parking lots with high-intensity use. 
Hotel, motel or inn means an establishment that provides lodging for a fee to transients, including extended stay facilities, and may include such amenities as bars and lounges, conference rooms, exhibition halls, meeting rooms, restaurants, and similar facilities. 
Illicit connection means a connection to a municipal separate storm sewer system or connection to a combined sewer system without proper authority, or any connection that results in discharge that is not composed entirely of unpolluted stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit. 
Improvements mean, in relation to nonconformities, structures, accessory structures and similar improvements constructed upon land, a lot or a parcel. Improvements shall not include the value of land, a lot or a parcel. 
Intensity means the maximum number of nonresidential gross square feet allowed in a zoning district, based upon the maximum lot coverage and maximum building height. 
Intersection sight distance: See "sight distance." means the clear view provided to a driver and oncoming vehicles at intersections. 
Impermeable means a barrier or other feature, such as a layer of rock that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface, such as a building, paved road or driveway, parking lot, deck, swimming pool or patio. 
Junk, salvage or auto wrecking yard means a facility and associated land area for collection, disassembly disposal, sale, salvage or storage of discarded matter or waste material including abandoned, inoperative, or obsolete vehicles; construction debris; junk; scrap material and structural steel; and similar materials. This term includes a junk, scrap or auto wrecking yard. 
Kennel, boarding or breeding means an establishment that provides boarding, breeding, grooming, keeping for sale, selling, trading, training and related services for six or more dogs over four months of age. 
Kennel, private means the keeping of four or more dogs for noncommercial purposes by the resident of the property. 
Laboratory, medical, dental or veterinary means an establishment to perform analysis of blood, tissue or other human or animal product, and may include the construction or repair of prosthetic devices performed at the written order of a licensed physician or dentist. 
Lake means a body of water one acre or more in surface area, created either by a manmade or natural dam or other means of water impoundment. 
Land development regulations means ordinances enacted by the Council for the regulation of any aspect of development and includes any zoning, rezoning, permitted use, special exception use, prohibited use, planned development district, zoning district, overlay zoning district, subdivision, building construction, or sign, landscape, parking, land use, or similar regulations controlling the development or use of land. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including those practices as described as exempt under the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Article of Chapter 8. 
Landmark means a structure or site listed in the National Register of Historic Places, U.S. Department of Interior, or designated by local ordinance in accordance with guidelines issued by the U. S. Department of Interior. 
Large maturing tree means large maturing tree species that shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches immediately after planting. These species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 25 feet and a height of 35 feet when grown in Columbus, Georgia. 
Laundry, coin operated means a business that provides washing, drying, dry cleaning, or ironing machines for hire, to be used by customers on the premises. 
Lawnmower sales and service means an establishment engaged in the sale, service, and repair of lawn mowers, edgers, blowers, trimmers, and similar equipment used personally or professionally to maintain residential and nonresidential lawns. 
Logo means an established identifying symbol or mark associated with a business or business entity. 
Lot area means the area contained within the property lines of a lot, excluding space within any street right-of-way but including the area of any easement. 
Lot coverage means the portion of the area of a lot, normally expressed as a percentage, occupied by all buildings or structures, measured from the exterior walls, that are roofed or otherwise covered and that extend more than three feet above the surface ground level, excluding screen enclosures and swimming pools, but including detached garages and accessory structures. 
Lot frontage means that portion of a lot that abuts a public or private street. 
Lot line, corner means a side lot line located on a street right-of-way. 
Lot line, front means the lot line fronting the street right-of-way. 
Lot line, interior means the lot line separating two lots. 
Lot line, rear means the lot line opposite the front lot line. 
Lot line, side means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. 
Lot lines means the lines creating or forming the boundary of a lot. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or lease to, or separate use of, another, or for development. The word "lot" includes, but is not limited to, "plot" or "parcel." 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Muscogee County Superior Court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to May 27, 1970. 
Lot Size means the area contained within the property lines of a lot, excluding space within any street right-of-way but including the area of any easement. 
Lot width means the shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the required front building line. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect. 
Lot, flag means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot, interior means any lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, nonconforming means an lot that legally existed prior to the adoption this unified development ordinance or other, prior zoning code, but does not comply with current minimum lot size, lot depth or lot width requirements. 
Lot, single tier means a lot that backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, a major arterial, a nonresidential use, and to which access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited. 
Lot, through. See "Lot, double frontage". 
Lot, zero lot line means a lot specifically designed and subdivided for construction of a zero lot line dwelling. 
Mail and packing store means an establishment that provides mail collection, mailboxes, packing, shipping, stamps and similar services or products for compensation. 
Manager or City Manager means the appointed manager of the Columbus Consolidated Government or designee. 
Manufactured and mobile home sales means an establishment that a display, sells, leases, and services manufactured or mobile homes. 
Manufacturing, housing. See "Dwelling, manufactured." 
Manufacturing, heavy means the initial processing or treatment of raw materials or manufacturing of products that normally require additional processing, fabrication, or assembly for ultimate use by the consumer. 
Manufacturing, light means the manufacturing, fabricating or processing of finished products or parts, generally from materials previously prepared; and includes the incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products and parts, but does not include heavy industrial processing of materials. Light manufacturing also includes the processing and manufacturing of food. 
Marina, dock, pier or yacht club means a public, private or membership only marine facility for the mooring or storage of boats, and may include sale of marine products and fuel, boat and engine repair, rental or chartering of boats, and clubhouse for members, guests and visitors. 
Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Massage therapy means therapeutic message provided by a licensed professional masseuse. 
Material changes in appearance means a change that will affect the exterior architectural features or environmental features of a historic property or of any structure, site, or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: (1) a reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; or (2) demolition of a historic property; or (3) commencement of excavation; or (4) a change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way on any historic property; or (5) the erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structures within designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps, pavements, driveways, trees or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Mausoleum means an above ground structure used for the internment of human remains. 
Mean Sea Level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the flood plain. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Menu board means a freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a sandwich manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A". Such signs are usually designed to be temporary and are not considered permanent signs. 
Microbrewery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured or brewed beer or malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1. 
Microdistillery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of distilled spirits are manufactured on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.2. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1. 
Mining and extraction means the excavation of stones, rock, sand and gravel on a commercial basis, and includes the production of crushed stones, rock or gravel following excavation. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land that has been planned, designed and improved for the parking of mobile homes used as dwelling units. 
Mobile home. See "dwelling, mobile home." 
Model, residential means a permanent or temporary residential dwelling unit that is constructed for purpose of display to prospective buyers or renters. 
Modification means a type of administrative appeal that may be granted by the City Arborist only where specifically authorized by this UDO. 
Modification. See "alteration." 
Moving, transfer and storage means an establishment engaged in packing, pickup, transfer and delivery of household goods and equipment from one location to another, and may include the short- or long-term storage of such goods and equipment. 
Mulch means a layer of wood chips, pine straw, hay or other material placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold soil in place and aid in plant growth. 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention/retention ponds, and other stormwater facilities, which are owned and operated or maintained by the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
Natural area means an area of natural vegetation that is generally undisturbed, un-maintained, and is self-perpetuating. It includes not only trees, but also native shrubs, ground covers, wildflowers, vines, and grasses. 
New construction means as related to flood damage prevention means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after March 1, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter, load-bearing walls is new construction. 
New development means land disturbing activities, structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure, or creation of impervious surfaces on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 11 of these development regulations or any amendments thereto, relating to airports. 
Nursery and garden supply, retail means an establishment engaged in the sale of fertilizer; garden supplies; lawn mowers and similar equipment; lawn tools; plants, shrubs, trees and similar vegetation; and related items for the care of lawns and gardens. 
Nursery, wholesale means an establishment engaged in the wholesale growth, sale and distribution of plants, shrubs, trees and similar vegetation. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Obstructions mean, in relation to an outdoor cafe, permanent streetscape amenities that impede or delay free pedestrian passage along a public sidewalk or space and shall include, but are not limited to, trees, postal boxes, planters, hydrants, light poles, and sign poles. 
Office, business and professional means an establishment providing executive, management, and professional services to the public, including but not limited to the following: advertising, services, business offices of private companies, business offices of utility companies, public or nonprofit agencies, trade associations; employment offices, excluding day labor and labor pool services; professional or consulting offices for accounting, tax office, architecture, computer technology, design, engineering, landscape architecture, law, urban planning, and similar professions; property and financial management, real estate; secretarial and telecommunication services; travel agencies; and related services. 
Office, medical or dental means an establishment offering patients medical services, examinations, and treatments, by professionals trained in healing or health-related practices, including: chiropodist, chiropractors, dental surgeons, dentists, naturopaths, optometrists, osteopaths, physicians, psychiatrists, surgeons, or any similar profession recognized and licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Office, unclassified means any office use not specifically listed or defined in the United Development Ordinance. 
Office, veterinary means an establishment offering medical, surgical and related care to animals, including boarding of animals. 
Official Street Tree Planting Plan and Program means a plan and program adopted by the Council for the planting of trees along public streets, parks and other public places. 
Opaque means impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Ornamental grass means a grass planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening purposes. 
Outdoor advertising and sign fabrication means an establishment engaged in the fabrication of signs and billboards outdoor advertising or for indoor advertising. 
Outdoor cafe means an area adjacent to and directly in front of a ground-level eating or drinking establishment, operated by the operator of the establishment, located within the pedestrian area of the public right-of-way, and defined by "readily removable" railings or fencing or a combination of railings or fencing and landscaping in planter boxes which separates the encroachment area from the remainder of the public right-of-way, and is used exclusively for dining, drinking and circulation therein. The outdoor cafe is to be open to the sky with the exception that it may have a fixed or retractable awning or table umbrellas. An outdoor cafe may provide either waiter or waitress service or sell take-out items to be consumed in the outdoor dining area. 
Outdoor storage means the outside or outdoor storage of goods, material, vehicles, and any other equipment associated with the principal use of a building. 
Overlay zoning district means a zoning district that provides for specific regulations to be applied to a designated area in combination with the requirements of the underlying or base zoning district. 
Owner means a person listed as such on the contemporaneous tax roll. 
Package and liquor store means an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages. 
Paint, glass and wallpaper store means a retail establishment that sells paint and related home improvement products. 
Park means all public land set aside for open space and recreation purposes. 
Parking garage, commercial means an above- or below-ground structure designed and utilized for the temporary storage of automobiles for a fee. Services shall be limited to auto washing and detailing. 
Parking garage, private means an above- or below-ground structure designed and utilized for the temporary parking of automobiles associated with a specific use or building. 
Parking lot [means] an impervious surface used for the parking, storage or display of motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, etc. 
Parking lot, commercial means an improved, grade level area that is used for the temporary parking of automobiles for a fee. 
Pawn shop means a commercial use, operated by a pawnbroker, that is engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year and may be identified as such on a United States Geologic Service Quad map. 
Perimeter planting strip means any land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Permitted use means any use allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject to administrative review and compliance with all requirements contained in this UDO. 
Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal care services for two or more adults who are not related to the administrator by blood or marriage, as defined and licensed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12 as such Code Section may from time to time be amended. 
Personal Care Home, Type I means a personal care home that provides personal care services, for not more than six adult clients that may or may not be disabled, excluding staff, within a long term residential, family-like setting. 
Personal Care Home, Type II means a personal care home that provides personal care services for seven to 15 adult clients that may or may not be disabled, excluding staff, within a long term residential, family-like setting. 
Personal care means the for-profit or not-for-profit provision of housing, food, and one or more personal services on a fee basis to two or more adults not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage. 
Personal care services include but are not limited to individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. 
Personal services means an establishment providing services of a personal nature that are necessary on a frequent or recurring basis. Personal services may include the accessory retail sale of items related to service rendered. Personal services typically include beauty and barbershops; clerical services; dog grooming; garment repair; informational, instructional, personal improvement, or services of a similar nature; fortune telling and similar psychic services; and dry cleaning drop-off and pick-up stations; limited repair services; manicurists; photography studios; spas; shoe repair and shoeshine parlors; tailoring; and tanning salons. 
Persons means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or government entity, including trustees, receivers, assignees, or similar representatives thereof. 
Pet day care means and includes every place kept or maintained for the care, grooming, training, exercising, and socializing of live dogs or cats only by a person other than the owner of the live animal. Pet day care does not include facilities that provide breeding or selling of animals, or facilities whose primary source of revenue is licensed veterinarian services. 
Pharmacy or drug store means an establishment that dispenses prescribed drugs and medicines, and includes the retail sale of the following: books and offices supplies; convenience food and beverages; over the counter sale medical products; personal hygiene items; photography-related services; wedding chapels and related items. 
Place of worship means a building, including a church, mosque or synagogue, used primarily as a place of public or private worship on a permanent basis by a recognized and established religious sect or denomination registered as a not-for-profit organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
Place of worship, freestanding means a place of worship that is established as the principal use on a site, and is not located within building or development that includes two or more separate, distinct and different uses. 
Planned development means an overlay zoning district created to encourage creativity and imagination in the planning and development or redevelopment of large tracts of land for various uses and activities associated with a planned community under one master plan that may include a mix of land use types at different levels of intensity. In addition, a planned development also is encouraged to provide one or more benefits to the residents of the City. 
Planning Advisory Commission (PAC) means the advisory board appointed by the Council to review and make recommendations to the City Council and the Department of Community Development with regard to: a comprehensive plan or parts thereof for the development and redevelopment of the City; a zoning map; regulations for the subdivision of land within the city; a unified development ordinance for the City; and such other matters as may be required by ordinance or by direction of the City Council. 
Planning Department means the department of the same name duly created by the Council of Columbus. References to action by the "Planning Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Columbus Consolidated Government Planning Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of Planning. 
Planning Division means the Planning Division of the Planning Department. References to action by the "Planning Division" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Columbus Consolidated Government Planning Division to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of the Planning Department. 
Planting season means the time period or season during which newly planted trees will have the best opportunity for survival, and consisting of that period from November 1 st of any year to March 31 st of the following year. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in a recharge area. 
Postdevelopment conditions means the conditions that exist following the completion of the development activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume and direction of stormwater runoff. 
Predevelopment conditions means those land use conditions that existed prior to the initiation of the development activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and rate, volume and direction of stormwater runoff. 
Premises means the space or property defined by the perimeter building structure or parcel of land assigned to a single occupancy. 
Presiding official means the person chairing a meeting of the Board of Historic Architectural Review, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Council of Columbus, the Planning Advisory Commission, the Tree Board, the Uptown Facade Board, or similar board, in their official capacity. 
Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of the runway. The widths are shown on the airport zoning map. 
Print shop means an establishment engaged in printing, blueprinting and related copying of documents, including establishments that provide copiers, printers, and similar equipment for use by clients. 
Private tree means any tree located on private property. 
Produce stand means a temporary stand, structure, trailer or similar facility that is utilized to sell produce to passing motorists or pedestrians. 
Prohibited use means any use that is not a permitted use, a special exception use, or recognized as a similar use in a zoning district, and shall not be established in such district. 
Property means the real property, as a unit, which contains the premises and occupancies. 
Protected state river means any perennial river or watercourse that has an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has identified the Chattahoochee River as a protected river. 
Protected tree means a Beautification Plan Tree, a Public Protected Tree, or an exceptional specimen tree. 
Pruning means the elimination of live and dead branches from a tree's crown to improve tree structure, enhance vigor and maintain safety. 
Public improvement means the construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the City, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Public places means all lands owned by the City. 
Public Protected Tree means any tree located on lands owned by the consolidated government, its authorities or other constituent units ("CCG entities") or any land upon which easements are imposed for the benefit of CCG entities, or upon which other ownership control may be exerted by CCG entities including rights-of-way, parks, public areas and easements for drainage, sewer, water and other public utilities, with a DBH of six inches or more. 
Public transportation facilities means a single or multimodal transportation facility that provides transportation to the public on a fare basis, including bus and train stations. 
Public tree means any tree located on property belonging to the City. 
Public uses are buildings or structures, activities, and uses of land that are owned, operated and maintained by a federal, state, local, or other governmental entity, and may include but is not limited to the following: active or passive parks; administrative offices; airports; arenas, coliseums, fairgrounds and stadiums; boat storage, wet or dry; employee residences associated with public uses; libraries; convention, civic or trade centers; colleges or universities; correctional facilities; fire stations; maintenance yards; marina, dock, pier or yacht club; recreation centers; police stations or substations, and similar facilities. 
Publishing, printing and binding means an establishment engaged in blueprinting, printing and binding, publishing, typesetting, and similar activities for commercial, industrial, retail, service, and similar clients. 
Railroad yard means an area designed for a variety of railroad-related purposes including multiple tracks to allow makeup of trains, separation of trains, storing of railroad stock and switching of freight and passenger rolling stock. 
Readily removable means, in relation to an outdoor cafe, that railings, fencing, and furniture shall not be leaded, cemented, nailed, bolted, power riveted, screwed in, or affixed, even in a temporary manner, to the public sidewalk or a public open space area. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Recording studio means a studio engaged in the staging, production and recording of various forms of music, music videos, and similar types of productions. 
Recreation center, private means a facility that provides recreational services for a fee, including swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar uses. 
Recreation center, public means a property or building, owned by the city or other governmental agency, open to the general public for educational and recreational purposes, and may include swimming pools, tennis courts, activity buildings, and similar uses. 
Recreation, temporary means events with a limited time period such as community fairs, carnivals and similar events located on public or private property. 
Recreational equipment, major means a vehicular or portable structure transportable on a mobile chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling, or conveyance for recreational and vacation uses, including such equipment as travel trailers, pickup campers, coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, and other similar recreational equipment. 
Recreational establishment means any recreational use that requires large, open space facilities (such as a warehouse). These recreational uses include, but are not limited to, crossfit, rock climbing, physical training, baseball/softball facilities, gymnastics, tennis centers and similar uses. 
Recreational facility means clubhouses, parks, swimming pools, tennis courts, trails and similar facilities constructed for the common enjoyment of residents in a development or subdivision. 
Recreational vehicle means a camper, trailer, pickup camper, bus, or other vehicle with or without motor power, designed and constructed to travel on public thoroughfares without special permit in accordance with the vehicle code of the State of Georgia, and utilized for transient lodging. 
Recreational vehicle park means a facility designed specifically to accommodate overnight or short term parking of recreational vehicles and may include accessory recreational or commercial activities. 
Recycling collection box means an attended or unattended facility located throughout the community to accept donation or delivery of recyclable goods, including glass, cardboard, newspaper, paper, plastic and similar materials. 
Recycling collection center means a facility that accepts, classifies, stores and distributes recyclable materials for ultimate reuse. 
Recycling collection facility means a facility that accepts recycled materials and processes or treats such materials, such as glass, cardboard, newspaper, paper, plastic and similar materials, and returns them into a condition where they may be used again for production of other goods. 
Redevelopment means structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure; creation or addition of impervious surfaces; replacement of impervious surface not part of routine maintenance; and land disturbing activities associated with structural or impervious development. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling. 
Rehabilitation means the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. 
Removal means any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site, or the physical removal of a tree. 
Repair services, accessory means on premises repair services that support the principal use or activity and are clearly incidental to the principal use. 
Repair services, general means repair of large items offered to individual and businesses, including major appliances, lawn maintenance equipment, sheet metal, upholstery, electronic equipment, electrical equipment, furniture repair and refinishing, heavy equipment, mechanical equipment, plumbing equipment; carpentry repair, sign repair, and repair of similar types of equipment or services. 
Repair services, limited means small-scale repair services offered to individuals and households for such items as household electronic equipment; household equipment such as vacuum cleaners and small appliances; jewelry; watches and clocks; and similar types of equipment. 
Replacement tree means a new tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements, regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development. 
Residential zones means areas zoned RE10, RE5, RE1, RT, SFR1, SRF2, SFR3, RMD, RMF1, and RMF2 on the Official Zoning Map. 
Restaurant, accessory means a secondary use establishment that serves only a principal use such as a university or college, hotel or motel, institutional facility, office, retail, or similar large-scale use. 
Restaurant, general means an enclosed public eating place, that may include open air or sidewalk dining, where meals are ordered from a menu and provided for compensation, including but not limited to a cafeteria, coffee shop, diner, dining room, lunchroom, and tea room. 
Restaurant, specialty means establishment selling a limited variety of food and beverages that generally are prepared to order and consumed on-premises, and are typified by ice cream shops, health food shops, coffee shops, doughnut and bakery shops, delicatessens, and similar types of establishments. 
Restaurant, take out means establishment that provides ready-to-eat food to be consumed off the premises. 
Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
Resubdivision means a combination or recombination of previously recorded lots or tracts of contiguous land for purposes of creating a new lot or lots. 
Retail sales, general means establishments engaged in retail sales and rental of products, including antique stores; apparel for women and men; appliance sales; auto parts store; bicycle sales; book and stationary stores; business machines and office equipment sales; camera and photography sales and service; candy, nuts, and confectionery sales; drug stores and pharmacies; fabric stores; floor covering sales; farm and garden supply stores; food stores, excluding convenience stores; furniture stores, gift, novelty, and souvenir stores; hobby toy, and game shops; home furnishings, and equipment; hardware sales; household goods; jewelry stores; lawn and garden sales, including lawnmowers; leather goods and luggage stores; liquor and package sales; marine equipment sales, excluding boats and personal water craft; music and musical instrument sales; newsstand and cigar sales; office supplies; optical goods; pet shops; shoe stores; specialty merchandise, including artist's supplies, orthopedic and artificial limbs, sporting goods; tobacco shops; and similar uses as may be determined by the Director. 
Retirement home means a multifamily residential facility that provides independent living for elderly residents. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land over which the City has the right by ownership to construct a public street, sidewalk, or use for public utilities. 
Road frontage means the number of linear feet fronting a road with access from property. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roofline means the juncture of the roof and the perimeter wall of the structure. 
Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff or taxiing of aircraft along its length. 
Sanitary landfill means a public or private facility for the disposal of construction or demolition debris, and nonhazardous and nonmedical agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional or residential waste. 
Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system of the City which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
School, public or private means a facility operated by a public or private entity, for educational, technical or training purposes, including pre-kindergarten, elementary and secondary schools. 
School, vocational and nonacademic means a school that provides regularly scheduled classes and instruction in business, commercial, self-improvement, technical, vocational subjects, including automotive and aircraft mechanical and technological skills, building and construction trades, business skills, computer technology, electronics, medical and dental technologies, personal services, art, music, or karate schools and so forth, and related crafts and skills. 
Screening means a method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural topography or the like. 
Secondary permittee means an individual builder, utility company, or utility contractor that conducts a construction activity within a common development. 
Secondary uses means those restricted uses that may be allowed within certain office, retail, hotel or motel, or institutional uses, including the following: barber and beauty shops, bookstores, cafeterias and restaurants, convenience food stores, drugstores and pharmacies, florists, gift shops, newsstands and cigar or tobacco shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup/drop-off facilities, laundry facilities for residents, mail services, personal services oriented to the residents or tenants of the building, and print shops. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Self-permitting means the process permitted by Chapter 8 involving single-family residential construction. 
Self-storage facility means a structure consisting of individual, self-contained units leased for storage of business, commercial, or personal goods and belongings. 
Setback means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Shelter, homeless. See "transient lodging." 
Shelter, temporary means a for-profit or not-for-profit facility that provides emergency or temporary housing or protective sanctuary for victims of spouse abuse, child abuse, and such crimes as rape, assault, or other forms of personal attack. 
Shooting range, indoor means an enclosed facility utilized for practice, training, and education in the use of firearms and archery, including target practice and competitions. 
Shooting range, outdoor means an outdoor facility utilized for archery, target practice, skeet and trap shooting, mock war games, and competitions. 
Short-term rental unit means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit, either the primary structure or any approved accessory dwelling is provided for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Such use may or may not include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all single family and multi-family housing types and shall exclude group living or other lodging uses, as described in Chapter 3 and defined in Chapter 13, respectively, of the Unified Development Ordinance of the Columbus Consolidated Government. A short-term rental unit may not include a motor vehicle as defined in Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Such units shall be permitted and licensed in accordance with the requirements of Article 9 of Chapter 4 of this UDO. 
Shrub means a woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. 
Sign means any structure, housing, device, figure, statuary, painting display, message placard, other contrivance, or any part thereof, which is designed, constructed, created, engineered, used to advertise, or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising for any of the following purpose: to designate, identify, or indicate the name of the business of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is located; or, to advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered, or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising display is erected. 
Sign area means the entire face of a sign, including the surface and any framing projections, or molding but not including the support structure. Individual channel-type letters mounted on a building shall be measured by the area enclosed by four straight lines or lining each word. 
Sign, abandoned means any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or service which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned, regardless of whether abandonment was intended. 
Sign, animated means any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights, lighting device or devices which changes color, flash, alternate, show movement, motion, or change the appearance of said or any part thereof automatically. 
Sign, awning or canopy means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Sign, bench means a sign painted or attached to any portion of a bench. 
Sign, changeable copy means a sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means, including time and temperature. A trivision sign is a changeable copy sign. 
Sign, construction means a temporary sign erected on the parcel on which construction is taking place, thereby limited to the duration of the construction. This sign shall include the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar artisans, and the owner, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a major role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
Sign, directional means directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one way," "entrance," or "exit." 
Sign, directory means a sign for listing the tenants or occupants and their suite numbers of a building or center. 
Sign, double-faced means a single structure designed with the intent of providing copy on both sides. 
Sign, flappers/moving means a sign which swings or bends from a frame which is typically used for advertising, such as oil products, cigarettes, the Lottery, etc. 
Sign, flashing means a sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source or flashing illumination. 
Sign, ground means an outdoor sign supported by one or more uprights, posts, poles or bases in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. Sometimes called a "detached," "freestanding" or "pole" sign. 
Sign, identification means a sign providing the name, address, and logo of a building or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a mean of identifying said building or establishment. 
Sign, illegal means a sign that does not comply with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection. A sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, not maintained or not used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than three months; a sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance; a sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; a sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
Sign, illuminated means a sign that emits or reflects, either directly or indirectly, artificial light from any source. 
Sign, incidental means a small sign limited to information and directions related to the permitted use on the lot or building on which the sign is located, and containing no direct illumination. Examples of incidental signs would include "no smoking," "restroom," "no soliciting," "no trespassing," "open," "closed," signs indicating hours of business, and similar information. 
Sign, inflatable means an inflatable balloon, blimp, or object used for advertising. 
Sign, marquee means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
Sign, message center means a sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical or electrical means, including time and temperature. A trivision sign is a message center sign. 
Sign, multiple-sided means any sign having more than two geometric surfaces upon which copy is placed. 
Sign, nonconforming means any advertising sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this chapter and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
Sign, non-illuminated means a sign that does not emit or reflect artificial light from any source either directly or indirectly. 
Sign, ornamentation means a sign having the characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. To include pennants, streamers, garland, garnish, rotating and/or fluttering devices designated to attract attention. 
Sign, permanent means a sign permanently affixed to a building or to the ground. 
Sign, portable means a sign mounted on a trailer type frame with or without wheels or skids designed to be transported and not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure. 
Sign, projecting means any sign affixed to a building wall or structural and extending beyond the building wall, structure or building line or property line. 
Sign, promotional means a sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or to promote a special sale. 
Sign, real estate means an on-site sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises. 
Sign, revolving means any sign erected or constructed as to periodically change the direction toward which any plane containing the sign surface area is oriented. 
Sign, roof means an erected or constructed above or placed upon or over a roof of a building which is wholly or partly supported by such building. This does not include a mansard or facade sign. 
Sign, subdivision means any sign designed to identify a subdivision or neighborhood. 
Sign, temporary means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
Sign, vehicle means a sign, which is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on, or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or an activity or business located on such property. 
Sign, V-shaped means a sign constructed in the form of a "V" with an angle no greater than 45 degrees and at no point separated by a distance greater than five feet. 
Sign, monument means an independent sign affixed to the ground and supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base. 
Site means, for the purposes of historic preservation activities, the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical, cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Site development permit means a permit issued giving authorization to begin land disturbing activities for all non-exempt land disturbing activities other than those requiring a UDP (Utility Development Permit) or MLD (Minor Land Disturbance Permit) as defined in Chapter 10 of this UDO. 
Site plan means a plan provided that reflects existing and proposed conditions on a site that is intended for construction. This may include but is not limited to topography, structures or additions, grading, drainage, erosion control measures, trees to be saved or planted to comply with the applicable standards of these land development regulations, best management practices, parking requirements, streets and other type improvements. 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. 
Small maturing tree means a small maturing tree species that shall be a minimum of five feet in height and have a caliper of at least one and one-half inches immediately after planting. These species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet and a height of 25 feet when grown in Columbus, Georgia. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Pine Mountain Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Soil and Water Conservation District means the Pine Mountain Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Special event means a temporary event which may occur for one or more days, including but not limited to outdoor festivals, craft shows, carnivals and similar outdoor amusements, plant sales, parades on public rights-of-way, seasonal sales of merchandise including fireworks and Christmas trees, concerts, and any other event open to and expected to attract both residents and non-residents of the City. 
Special exception use means a use which would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, or appearance, and which may contain conditions of approval required by the Council. 
Specified anatomical area means one or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; 
(2)  Buttocks; 
(3)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means as follows: 
(1)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Acts of human analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, or sodomy, whether actual or simulated; 
(3)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction means, for the initiation of new construction or a substantial improvement, the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction or substantial improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., O.C.G.A. § 12-5-3(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stormwater conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as pipes, inlets, manholes, ditches, depressions, swales, streams, etc. 
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater Management Manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, published August 2001, and as may be amended from time to time. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and which shall include a system of vegetation or structural measures, or both that controls the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following precipitation. 
Stormwater runoff means the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following precipitation. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Stream buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks along State waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural state of vegetation which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Street means any vehicular way, other than an alley, that: 
(1)  Is an existing federal, state, county or municipal roadway; 
(2)  Is constructed as shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law and is open to vehicle travel; 
(3)  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the City Council; or 
(4)  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel and shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Clerk's Office, Muscogee County Superior Court prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. Land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, shall be considered part of the street. 
Street, arterial means, unless otherwise defined by an adopted transportation plan or the Comprehensive Plan, a street connecting two or more towns or communities, connecting two highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. 
Street, collector means, unless otherwise defined by an adopted transportation plan or the Comprehensive Plan, a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal or greater classification. 
Street, limited access means a street providing for traffic movement for expeditious movement for large volumes of through traffic between areas and across the city and not intended to provide land access service. 
Street, local—commercial or industrial means, unless otherwise defined by an adopted transportation plan or the Comprehensive Plan, any public street, except an alley, collector, or arterial, and which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area such as an industrial park or commercial subdivision. 
Street, local—residential means, unless otherwise defined by an adopted transportation plan or the Comprehensive Plan, any public street, except an alley, collector, or arterial, and which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area such as a neighborhood or a single subdivision. 
Street, low volume local means a local street that carries or is expected to carry fewer than 300 vehicle trips per day. 
Street, marginal access [means] A residential or nonresidential street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
Street, private means a road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the City and that is not owned and maintained by a federal, state, City, or another public entity. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures, identified in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the long-term or temporary use of which requires permanent location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having permanent location in or on the ground, including but not limited to the following: buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, radio and television antennae, including supporting towers, and swimming pools. 
Structure, legal nonconforming means a building or structure that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated but which is legal because of its existence prior to the requirements of these land development regulations. 
Subdivision means division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of either immediate or future sale, lease or building development, including all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building prior to improvement. The market value of the building should be: (1) the appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building, as indicated in the definition above. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified through enforcement of this UDO and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Tattoo and body piercing shop means an establishment that provides either of both of the following: (1) puncturing the skin with a needle or similar instrument and inserting indelible ink or colors so as to leave a permanent mark or design on the skin; or (2) creating an opening in the body to allow the insertion of jewelry or other decoration. 
Taxidermy means an establishment that prepares, stuffs, and mounts the skins or surfaces of animals or fish so as to create lifelike replicas. 
Technology park means an area that utilized an overall planned development approach to create a unified site that supports light manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities and office parks as the predominant use. 
Telecommunications and digital exchange means all or a portion of a structure that consolidates or connects the equipment and communication facilities of one or more telecommunications service providers, including wireless, non-wireless, digital and analog communications. 
Television and radio studio means a studio for the staging, broadcasting, production or transmission of live or recorded television or radio shows. 
Temporary building or structure means a structure used during construction of a residential or nonresidential project, and may be used as a sales model for residential projects. 
Temporary use or special event means a use or event that is scheduled for a limited period of time and includes such activities as outdoor festivals, craft shows, carnivals and similar outdoor amusements, flea markets, plant sales, parades on public rights-of-way, seasonal sales of merchandise including fireworks and Christmas trees, concerts, and any similar other event. 
Temporary wireless communication facility means portable equipment without permanent foundation that is used for a limited period while a permanent facility is under construction, under repair or during a special public event or emergency. Also called a Cell on Wheels (COW). 
Tennis center or club means a public, private or membership only sport facility offering tennis courts, sale of tennis-related products, tennis education and clubhouse for members, guests and visitors. 
Terminal, truck, freight, rail or water means a facility for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage or delivery of goods and materials transported by a variety of modes. 
Theater, drive-in means an outdoor facility utilized for showing films, movies, videos, and similar electronic presentations. 
Theater, indoor means a building or structure utilized for showing films, movies, videos, and similar electronic presentations or for the presentation of live dramatic, dance, musical, and similar productions. 
Theater, outdoor means an outdoor facility utilized for the presentation of live dramatic, dance, musical, and similar productions. 
Timber harvesting means the felling, loading and transporting of timber products such as pulpwood, and may include both clear cutting and selective cutting of timber. 
Tire retreading and recapping means a facility that is engaged in the retreading, recapping and general refurbishment of used tires. 
Topping means the severe cutting back of branches to a stub, bud, or a lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. 
Tower means any structure designed and constructed primarily for the support of one or more antennae and including guyed, self-support (lattice) and monopole types, excluding concealed support structures. 
Towing service means an establishment that provides for the removal and temporary storage of disabled vehicles. 
Toxic chemical means any chemical deemed by the City Arborist to be damaging to the tree or the soil on public lands. 
Trademark means a word or name that, with a distinctive type or letter style, is associated with a business or business entity in the conduct of business. 
Transient lodging means a public or private facility that provides short-term housing and meals for poor, transient, or needy individuals. 
Transitional Housing Facility, Type I means group housing for individuals and juveniles undergoing some form of treatment, therapy, medical care, counseling, guidance or other similar assistance for current or former use and abuse of addictive or controlled substances, including legal or illegal drugs and chemical, alcohol, tobacco, any similar substance, any other chemical or substance, or any combination thereof. 
Transitional Housing Facility, Type II means group housing for individuals and juveniles that are under some form of judicial or correctional control, direction, guidance or counseling, including but not limited to the following categories: (1) work release programs for current or former convicts, (2) alternative incarceration or correctional programs, (3) halfway housing, (4) prerelease programs, (5) pre-sentencing programs, or (6) any similar type of non-traditional incarceration or control program. 
Transmission lines, electrical means overhead or underground lines for the bulk transmission of electricity between generating or receiving plants and major delivery points such as a major utility substations. 
Tree density standard (TDS) means the minimum number of Tree Density Units per acre, which must be achieved on a property. 
Tree density unit (TDU) means a credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in Article 6 of Chapter 4 of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
Tree master plan means a plan prepared by the Tree Board that guides the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees on public lands. 
Tree means a usually tall, woody plant, distinguished from a shrub by having comparatively greater height and includes a large maturing tree and a small maturing tree. 
Tree permit means that consent given in writing by the City Arborist to a person, private firm or agency to maintain, remove or do any work requiring a permit involving any tree within the public right-of-way or other public property. 
Tree planting standards and specifications means the design standards and specifications adopted for the planting or maintenance of trees. 
Tree protection area (TPA) means any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with applicable requirements of these land development regulations, and shall include nothing less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree or group of trees collectively. 
Tree protection or planting plan (TP/PP) means a plan that identifies tree protection areas where existing trees are to be protected and preserved, and replacement trees planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree save area means all areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree, street means any existing tree or any tree to be planted on the street right-of-way. 
Tree thinning means selective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as including clear cutting. 
Tree, mature means an existing hardwood, pine or other valuable tree that is at least four inches in diameter as measured four feet above grade and has attained the capability of flowering and reproducing. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of Rainbow, Brown or Brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Undisturbed vegetation means natural vegetation in a generally untouched, maintenance free, self-perpetuating stand comprised of indigenous trees, shrubs, herbs, flowers or grasses. 
University or college means an institution of higher learning offering undergraduate or graduate degrees, and including all academic, support, residence, maintenance, administrative, laboratory, scientific, athletic, and similar buildings or facilities. 
Upholstery shop means an establishment engaged in the repair and replacement of upholstery to household, nonresidential and office furniture. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
Use means the specific purpose for which land, a structure or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. Unless otherwise indicated by the text of this UDO, "use" shall mean "principal use" and not "accessory use." 
Use, accessory means use subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal use of a building or lot, and customarily incidental thereto. Unless otherwise indicated by the text of this UDO, "use" shall mean "principal use" and not "accessory use." 
Use, legal nonconforming means a use of a building or land that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated but which is legal because of its existence prior to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Use, noncommercial means a use serving a public purpose, such as a governmental office or facility, place of worship, private or public school and similar uses. 
Use, principal means the main use of a building or lot. Unless otherwise indicated by the text of this UDO, "use" shall mean "principal use" and not "accessory use." 
Used/second hand merchandise shop means an establishment wholly or predominantly engaged in the sale of ordinary used, secondhand or junk merchandise, including but not limited to books, clothes, electronic and mechanical equipment and parts, furniture, household goods, jewelry, shoes, tools of all kinds, toys, and similar items that are donated, purchased or otherwise acquired for resale. 
Utility easement means the right-of-way acquired by a utility or governmental agency or private agency to locate utilities, including all types of pipelines, television cable, telephone and electric cables. 
Utility substation, minor means one or more elements means of utility distribution, collection, or transmission networks or facilities, which provide utility service to a relatively limited geographical area. 
Utility, major means one or more elements means of utility distribution, collection, or transmission networks or facilities that provides utility services to a regional or subregional geographic area, including electrical substations. 
Utility, minor or minor utility structures means minor utility improvements or structures providing for public safety, public utilities, and similar elements to promote the public welfare are permitted, including such improvements as drainage facilities; fire hydrants; ground-mounted utilities support structures and poles for cable television, electricity, natural gas, telephone, and related services; lift or pump stations; postal collection boxes; public or private streets; water and sewer lines; and similar public improvements. 
Utility plant means utility plants, including sewer and water treatment plants, electrical generation facilities, and natural gas distribution plants. 
Utility, public means a firm or organization, including any agency of a federal, state or local government or agency, that provides utility services, including cable television, electricity, natural gas, sanitary sewer, water, and similar services, to the public. 
Value means, for the purposes of addressing damaged, destroyed or nonconforming structures, the value of all buildings and related improvements, as determined by the latest official ad valorem property tax, excluding the value of the land, lot or parcel. 
Variance, hardship means the application of a requirement, standard or provision of this UDO will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
Variance, special exception means a method for requesting relief from the following requirements of this UDO: minimum building setbacks; maximum building height; minimum lot width; minimum separation between agricultural and nonagricultural uses; public street frontage; buffers and screening; signage, in accordance with a uniform sign plan; parking requirements; roadway widths; storm water management requirements; and soil erosion and sedimentation requirements. 
Variance, use means a grant of authority to establish a use that is otherwise prohibited within the zoning district. 
Video game and amusement parlor means any establishment containing four or more coin-or token-operated video and amusement games, skill machines or devices or any combination of such machines that are available for the use of the public. 
Video sales and rental means an establishment engaged in the rental or sale of videotapes, video games, and similar materials. 
Wall, opaque means a solid wall or fence constructed of brick, concrete, masonry, metal, stone, wood or other similar material that provides 100 percent screening. 
Warehousing and distribution, general means an establishment engaged in the receipt, storage and distribution of goods, equipment, supplies and products. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned drinking water systems. This definition specifically excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or reservoir. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, guilty, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetlands, protected means those wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or otherwise approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based on competent studies prepared by a registered and qualified professional engineer. 
Wireless Communications. Wireless communications shall mean any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (ESMR), private mobile radio (PRMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
Wireless Communication Facility (WCF). A WCF is any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, and equipment facility, and a tower structure or other structure used to achieve the necessary elevation. 
Wireless Communication Facility Concealed Support Structure. The use of design techniques used to blend buildings or structures into the existing surroundings to camouflage or disguise the appearance of the WCF. Concealed support structures on unimproved property must be designed to resemble natural vegetation such as a monopine or man-made structure such as a streetlight. 
Wholesale, general means an establishment that involves the inventory, sale and distribution of large or relatively large quantities of goods to retailers for resale to consumers or to other wholesalers. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or driveway or as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, front means the area across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the lot to the front line of the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porch or terrace and any driveway. Measurement of the front yard shall be determined by the distance between the nearest front lot line and the nearest building line. 
Yard, rear means the area extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the main building, excluding any driveway. Measurement of the rear yard shall be determined by the distance between the rear lot line and the nearest building line. 
Yard, side corner means the lot area between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between a street right-of-way and any structure or any projections thereto. 
Yard, side means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front building line to the rear yard, or to the rear line of the lot where no rear yard is required. It shall be determined by the average distance between the building line and the side property line, except that an existing structure on an irregular lot may be measured at the front building line. 
Zoning buffer means an area required by the unified development ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special exception use or variance approval for a specific property. 
Zoning ordinance means the action by the Council of Columbus Georgia rezoning a property. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 07-54, § 1, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 07-75, § 1, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 08-66, § 1, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 10-41, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 10-52, § 1, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 12-53, § 4, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 14-19, §§ 3, 4, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 15-52, § 1, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 15-55, § 4, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 18-45, § 3, 10-9-18; Ord. No. 19-005, § 2, 2-26-19; Ord. No. 19-011, § 1, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 19-013, § 2, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 19-017, § 7, 4-9-19) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
  
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code, beginning with Supplement No. 31 of the 1957 Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Note— "Rpld" is abbreviation for "repealed." 

 