CODE - COLUMBUS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, May 14, 1957 
Effective June 14, 1957 
____________ 
Revised 2000 
____________ 
Republished by Order of the City Council  2001 
____________ 

> 
FIRST OFFICIALS 
of the 
CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT 
OF 
COLUMBUS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Mayor 
J. R. ALLEN 
____________ 
Councilmen 

 
____________ 
City Manager 
FRANKLYN LAMBERT 
____________ 
City Attorney 
LENNIE F. DAVIS 
____________ 
Clerk of Council 
LEMUEL H. MILLER, JR. 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT 
OF 
COLUMBUS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Mayor 
BOBBY G. PETERS 
____________ 
Councilors 
NATHAN SUBER 
ROBERT S. POYDASHEFF 
JULIUS HUNTER, JR. 
EVELYN TURNER PUGH 
JOHN J. RODGERS 
R. GARY ALLEN 
EVELYN WOODSON 
CHARLES E. MCDANIEL 
RICHARD H. SMITH 
BERRY HENDERSON 
____________ 
City Manager 
CARMEN CAVEZZA 
____________ 
City Attorney 
HARDY POLLEYS 
____________ 
Clerk of Council 
TINY B. WASHINGTON 
PREFACE 
This Code is a republication of the 1978 Edition of the Columbus Code to change format to double column and include Ordinances adopted through Ordinance Number 00-90, adopted October 10, 2000. 
The 1978 Edition of the Columbus Code constitutes a republication of the Code of 1957. 
This Code is a revision and codification of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature that were deemed advisable to be included. 
This Code is an entire new codification and, as expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, supersedes all ordinances not included herein or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance, with the exception, however, of Chapter 12 containing certain public utility franchises, which chapter is included in this volume for information only. This Code contains only ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the city, rather than all of them, or relating to special purposes, such as the ordinances levying special assessments, providing for bond issues, paving, vacating and opening specified streets, etc., are not included herein. For more specific enumeration of the type of ordinances which are not included herein, see section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. All the ordinances have been classified as to subject matter, edited, revised and in many instances completely rewritten. New words and phrases and even whole sections have been added to make this Code comprehensive in scope and lucid in meaning. 
As it will be noted, the chapters have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Attention is also directed to the appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which also refer to correlative charter provisions and relevant state laws. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 20 is 20-14. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections, that would logically come between sections 4-4 and 4-5, is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2 and 4-4.3 respectively. 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the innovation of the looseleaf system of binding and up-keep servicing for the City of Columbus. With this new looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up to date continuously. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting and deleting the obsolete pages. To each such amendment will be attached an editorial footnote explaining briefly the effect of the amendment. When incorporated into this Code, each such section may be cited as a part hereof as provided in section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintaining of this Code up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing the same, and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The general index to the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Time and effort have not been spared in the preparation of this Code and the publishers are most grateful to the City Attorney, Mr. Roscoe Thompson, and to the City Manager, Mr. J. A. Willman, for their cooperation and untiring efforts during the progress of the editorial work. 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of B. Meade White of the editorial staff of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Especial credit must be granted to Mrs. Elnora S. Fuller of the editorial staff for technical assistance, and to Mrs. Frances Ryle, Miss Remona Hearrin, Miss Gloria Paige, Mrs. Joyce Tucker and Mrs. Ruth Rogers of the publisher's secretarial staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
This republication was completed under the direct supervision of John E. Dombroski, vice president for production, and Meghan Inman, editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to other members of the publishers' staff for their able assistance throughout the project, and to Tiny B. Washington, Clerk of Council, Columbus, and other city officials for their cooperation and assistance in this publication. 
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of Columbus, Georgia. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting A New Code of Ordinances of the City of Columbus, Georgia, Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective; and for Other Purposes. 
Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City of Columbus, Georgia: 
Section 1. That this ordinance, consisting of Chapter 1 to 22, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Columbus, Georgia", and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the City Commission, prior to March 8, 1957, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose; and except Chapter 12 of the Code, containing public utility franchises, which are set out in this volume for information only. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect thirty days from date this ordinance becomes law and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Columbus enacted on final passage on or before March 7, 1957, and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. That no resolution of the city, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Commission, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, nor shall such repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the City Commission to any person, firm, or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, nor shall such repeal affect ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, bus stops, taxi stands, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any amendment to the zoning map on file in the office of the City Auditor and Clerk; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City; nor shall it affect any ordinance extending the boundaries of the City; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance putting into effect any Act of the Legislature of Georgia; nor shall such repeal affect any general tax ordinance of the City or any amendments thereto. 
Section 4. Any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Columbus" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the City Commission. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Columbus. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Columbus to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of the City of Columbus. 
Section 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 9. This Ordinance shall be published once, within ten days after its final passage, in The Columbus Ledger, a newspaper of general circulation published in the City of Columbus, to become effective on the thirtieth day after passage. 
Introduced and read at a regular meeting of the Commission of the City of Columbus, Georgia, held on the 30th day of April, 1957; read a second time at a regular meeting of said Commission held on the 14th day of May, 1957, and adopted at said meeting by affirmative vote of 5 members of the Commission. 
Commissioner Berry voting yes. 
Commissioner Davis voting yes. 
Commissioner Johnson voting yes. 
Commissioner Key voting yes. 
Commissioner Register voting yes. 
B. F. REGISTER 
Mayor 
HENRY G. BRANNON 
City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter, as approved by the Governor on April 5, 1993, numbered Act. No. 279 (H.B. 634). Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, FORM, BOUNDARIES AND SERVICES OF CONSOLIDATED GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1-100. - Consolidation of city and county; creation of consolidated government; name. 
The governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions now vested in the City of Columbus, a municipal corporation created by an Act of the General Assembly approved December 19, 1928 (Ga. L. 1828, p. 153), as amended, and particularly but not in limitation as amended by an Act of the General Assembly approved August 5, 1921 (Ga. L. 1921, p. 800), as amended, are hereby consolidated with the governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions of the County of Muscogee, such consolidation of the governments of the City of Columbus and the County of Muscogee being pursuant to constitutional power granted by Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended, particularly by an amendment ratified at the general election held on November 5, 1968 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 1508), and in accordance with an Act of the General Assembly approved April 25, 1969 (Ga. L. 1969, p. 3571). Said consolidation shall result in the establishment of a single county-wide government with powers and jurisdiction throughout the territorial limits of Muscogee County, which single government shall supersede and replace the governments of the City of Columbus and the County of Muscogee and, to the extent provided in this Charter, shall also supersede and replace any public authorities and special service districts located and operating within Muscogee County. All areas of Muscogee County outside of Bibb City and the Fort Benning Reservation are hereby annexed as a part of the City of Columbus and shall become hereby a part of the City of Columbus which is hereby consolidated with Muscogee County, and the single government hereby created shall be considered for all purposes as being a consolidation of the governments of Columbus as defined hereby with the County of Muscogee, and the single government which supersedes and replaces the governments of the City of Columbus and County of Muscogee shall be considered as a consolidation of the City of Columbus with boundaries to the Muscogee County line with the exception of Bibb City and the Fort Benning Reservation. It is the express intention of the General Assembly in enacting this provision to declare as a city and as a part of the City of Columbus all the area of Muscogee County with the exception of Bibb City and the Fort Benning Reservation. Said county-wide government shall be a new political entity, a body politic and corporate, and a political subdivision of the State, to be known as "Columbus, Georgia, "(herein at times called "the consolidated government") having all of the governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions heretofore held by and vested in the City of Columbus and Muscogee County, and also the powers, duties and functions provided in this Charter. The consolidated government shall be a public corporation; shall have perpetual succession; shall, without the necessity or formality of a deed, bill of sale or other instrument of transfer, own, possess and hold all the properties (of whatsoever kind or nature), assets, contracts, franchises, things, rights, privileges, immunities, real and personal property theretofore owned, possessed, enjoyed or held by the City of Columbus and the County of Muscogee; and by the name of Columbus, Georgia shall be able to contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued as provided by this Charter, plead and be impleaded, in all courts of this State, and do all other acts relating to its corporate capacity; and shall be able in law and equity to purchase, have and hold, receive, enjoy, accept, possess and retain for the use and benefit of said Columbus, Georgia, in perpetuity or for any term of years, any estate or estates (real or personal), lands, tenements, hereditaments of whatsoever kind or nature within or without the territorial limits of the consolidated government, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or by any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by the consolidated government, and to use, manage, and improve, sell and convey, rent or lease same; and to have and use a common seal. From and after the effective date of the Charter, the political subdivision known as Muscogee County, Georgia, and the municipal corporation known as the City of Columbus, Georgia shall be merged into the said new political entity herein created. 
Sec. 1-101. - Form of government. 
The Consolidated Government provided by this Charter shall be known as the Mayor-Council-City Manager form of government. The Mayor shall be aided by City Officers, who, in the performance of their duties, shall be responsible and accountable to the Mayor except as otherwise provided in this Charter, by Georgia Law or by Rules of the State Bar of Georgia. Those persons who are deemed to be City Officers are set forth in sec. 4-300 of this Charter, as amended. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 1-102. - Boundaries of the consolidated government. 
The territory embraced in the consolidated government shall be the total area of Muscogee County, as the same may be now or hereafter fixed and established by law. 
Sec. 1-103. - Taxing districts. 
(1)  The consolidated government shall, within the geographic limits thereof comprise two (2) or more taxing districts, (herein called "services districts"), wherein taxes shall be assessed, levied, and collected by the consolidated government in accordance with the kind, character, type, degree, and level of services provided by said government within said services districts, and the rate and manner of taxation may vary in any one (1) district from that in another or other districts. The powers, authority, duties, liabilities, and functions of the consolidated government may vary in any district from that in another or other districts, as provided by ordinance. 
(2)  The Council of the consolidated government shall, pursuant to the applicable provisions of Article IX, Section 9-102 hereof divide the territory of the consolidated government into two or more taxing districts (herein called "services districts"); provided, however, at least one of such districts shall be known as the general services district and shall consist of the total area of Muscogee County as fixed and established on the effective date of this Charter or as thereafter modified according to law; and provided, further, the Council shall establish at least one or more urban services districts which shall embrace such territory or territories for which provision is made by the Council for additional or higher levels of services than are provided uniformly throughout the territory of the consolidated government on the effective date of this Charter. In the establishment of the first urban services district or districts, the Council shall hold one or more public hearings thereon at which all interested persons affected thereby shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place, and date of such hearings shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation including the newspaper having the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia, at least twice during the week immediately preceding the date of the hearing. 
(3)  The consolidated government is hereby empowered to exercise and provide within the General Services District and within any urban services district established by this Charter or by ordinance of the Council those powers, functions and services which have theretofore been exercised and provided by Muscogee County or the City of Columbus, or both; all powers, functions and services authorized by this Charter, and any amendments thereto; and all powers, functions and services which counties and municipal corporations, or both, are now or hereafter authorized to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(4)  The consolidated government shall perform within the General Services District those governmental duties, functions and services which are generally available and accessible to all residents throughout the total area of said government. 
(5)  The consolidated government shall perform within its urban services districts those additional, more comprehensive and intensive and higher levels of governmental duties, functions and services which benefit primarily the residents of such urban services districts. 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, urban services districts of the consolidated government shall be created, expanded, merged, consolidated, or reduced only by ordinance duly adopted by the Council under such general rules, procedures, regulations, requirements, and specifications as established by the Council; provided however, no new urban service district shall be created or existing urban services districts expanded, abolished, merged, consolidated, or reduced without providing an opportunity for interested persons to be heard by publishing a notice of a public hearing on the proposed expansion, consolidation, reduction, or creation of an urban services district in one or more newspapers of general circulation including the newspaper having the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia, for a period of once each week for at least two successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing. Such rules and regulations shall set forth the manner and method for creation of new urban services districts, expansion, consolidation, reduction, or merger of existing urban services districts, requirements for defining functions and policies for rendering services, changes in levels of services within existing services districts, transferring territory from one services district to another, requirements for defining boundaries of services districts, procedures, expansion, reduction, or consolidation of existing services districts and requirements for defining boundaries of services districts. 
(HB 415, § 1, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 1-104. - Limitations. 
Nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed so as to affect the status of any incorporated municipality located within Muscogee County other than the City of Columbus, and the status or relationship that such incorporated municipalities bear to Muscogee County and the City of Columbus prior to the adoption of this Charter shall continue to the same extent with the consolidated government. 
ARTICLE II - POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 2-100. - Powers and duties. 
(1)  The consolidated government shall have and be vested with, to the same extent as if herein repeated, all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority that the City of Columbus or Muscogee County, or both, has under the Constitution, and general and special laws of Georgia at the time of the adoption of this Charter, except as herein expressly modified. 
(2)  In addition to the foregoing, the consolidated government shall have all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority herein conferred or herein enlarged, and such other rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority as may be necessary and proper for carrying the same into execution, and also all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority, whether express or implied, that may be now vested in or hereafter granted to counties or municipal corporations, or both, by the Constitution of Georgia and laws of this state, including the powers vested in the consolidated government by this Charter. 
(3)  The consolidated government, in addition to the rights, duties, powers, privileges and authority expressly conferred upon it by this Charter, shall have the right, duty, power, privilege, and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, duties, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary and proper to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants and to exercise all implied power necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its local affairs, property and government, which are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental duties and functions. 
(4)  No enumeration of any right, power, privilege or authority hereinafter made shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege or authority hereinabove set forth. 
(5)  No repeal of any law under which the consolidated government derives any right, power, privilege or authority, except by amendment of this Charter as herein provided, shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any such right, power privilege or authority hereinabove set forth. 
ARTICLE III - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 
Chapter 1. - The Council 

Sec. 3-100. - Number; terms of Councilors; election. 
(1)  The members of the Council who are serving as such on January 1, 1993, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such offices shall continue to serve as such members for the remainder of their terms of office. 
(2)  The Council shall consist of ten (10) members. The terms of Councilors shall be four (4) years commencing on the regular meeting time set by the Council within seven (7) days following the first Monday in January next following their election except that a Councilor selected to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. Councilors shall be elected as provided in Article VI of this charter. Councilors shall serve until the expiration of their terms of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(3)  Each Council post shall be numbered. Members of the Council serving on January 1, 1993, and any successor to such a member filling a vacancy for an unexpired term shall continue their respective post designations in effect on January 1, 1993, for the remainder of the term of office. Beginning with the regular elections in 1994 and 1996, the post numbers shall correspond with the numbering of the respective Council districts as members are elected to the eight (8) Council districts provided for in Section. 6-101 of this charter. The member elected to the Council as an at-large member in 1994 shall continue to be, the designated Post 9 Councilor and the member elected to the Council as an at-large member in 1996 shall continue to be the designated Post 10 Councilor. After the regular elections in 1994 and 1996, the Council shall have eight (8) District Councilors and two (2) Councilors at large. 
Sec. 3-101. - Qualifications of Councilors. 
A Councilor shall be a citizen of the United States; shall have been a resident and qualified elector of the consolidated government for a least two (2) years prior to the date of his or her election; and shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age when elected to office. In addition to such qualifications, a District Councilor shall have been a resident of the district from which elected for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the date of his or her election and shall continue to reside therein, during his or her term of office. Any Councilor who removes his or her residence from the consolidated government or in the case of a District Councilor, from the district from which elected, shall thereby vacate his or her office. No person holding the office of Councilor shall hold any other elective public office or any appointive position of employment within the consolidated government. 
Sec. 3-102. - Compensation and expenses. 
Councilors shall receive as compensation for their services an amount fixed by ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by Section 4-203 of this Charter, each cOUNCILOR shall receive the same salary and no increase or decrease in the annual compensation of Councilors shall become effective until the day of the commencement of the terms of Councilors elected at the next regular election following any increase or decrease in their annual compensation. The Council shall by ordinance establish a policy for reimbursement of the actual necessary expenses incurred by its members in the performance of their official duties. 
Sec. 3-103. - Organization of the Council; Officers; rules; quorum; meetings; employees. 
(1)  The Council shall meet at its usual meeting place for organization at the regular meeting time set by the Council within seven (7) days following the first Monday in January next following its election, at which time it shall elect by six (6) votes one (1) of its members as Mayor pro tem to serve until the next organizational meeting. It shall also elect a Clerk of Council who shall not be selected from its own membership. All appointments, elections and confirmations by the Council shall be viva voce and this vote recorded in the official journal. 
(2)  The Mayor and members of the Council, before entering upon their duties shall take and subscribe before a Judge of the Superior Court the following oath of office: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of Mayor (or Councilor as the case may be) of Columbus, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. So help me God." 
(3)  The Council shall adopt rules of procedure governing the transaction of its business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. Six (6) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, provided a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. 
(4)  The rules of the Council shall provide for regular meetings which shall be held at least twice in each month, and shall fix the date and place of all regular meetings; provided, however, that any regular meeting may be canceled upon the adoption of a resolution by a majority vote of the Council at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. In no event shall fewer than two (2) regular meetings be held in any month. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or by any six (6) members of the total membership of the Council upon no less than twelve (12) hours written notice to each member served personally or left at the usual place of business or residence of such member. Such notice of the special meeting may be waived in writing either before or after the meeting. Special meetings may be held at any time without notice upon attendance at such meeting of or waiver of notice by all members of the Council. 
(5)  All meetings of the Council shall be public and any citizen may have access to the minutes and records thereof at reasonable times. 
(6)  For each absence of a Councilor from a regular meeting of the Council, there shall be deducted from the pay of such Councilor a sum equal to two (2) percent of the annual salary of the Councilor; provided however, there shall be no deductions from the pay of a Councilor for absences from regular meetings where such absences have been excused by the Council by resolution setting forth the reason thereof and entered upon the journal. Absence from five (5) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a Councilor, unless the absence is excused by the Council by resolution setting forth the reason thereof and entered upon the journal. 
(7)  The Clerk of Council shall give notice of Council meetings to its members, to the Mayor and to the public as provided by ordinance, keep the journal of its proceedings, maintain a current and comprehensive index of all ordinances and resolutions and perform such other duties as may be assigned him or her by this Charter or by the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 3-104. - Powers of Council. 
(1)  All legislative power of the consolidated government including any such power which may hereafter be conferred on the consolidated government by amendment of this Charter, or by the Constitution or laws of Georgia, shall be vested in and exercised by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Where the Council has determined that a state of emergency exists, it may delegate its legislative powers to the Mayor to rule the City by proclamation and such proclamations shall have the force and effect of ordinances adopted by the Council and violators shall be punished by fine and imprisonment in like manner as violators of ordinances adopted by the Council of Columbus. 
(2)  In the exercise of its powers, the Council shall adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, as may be necessary or proper for the purpose of carrying into effect the powers conferred by this Charter and for the promotion and protection of the safety, health, peace, security and general welfare of the inhabitants of the consolidated government and may enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations by imposing penalties for violations thereof, as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(3)  The Council may by ordinance create, change, alter, combine, abolish and consolidate bureaus, boards, commissions, departments, divisions, authorities, offices, and agencies of the consolidated government including positions of public employment and may transfer and delete functions and assign additional functions to any of the bureaus, offices, agencies, departments, divisions, boards, authorities, commissions and positions of public employment existing under this Charter. 
(4)  The Council may bring charges against any appointed officer or employee not in the merit service of the consolidated government for lack of qualifications, incompetence, neglect of duty, gross misconduct in reference to his or her duties, or violation of the Code of Ethics provided in Appendix Two of this Charter. The charges shall be presented in writing to the appointing authority, and if he or she does not remove the accused, the Council may order a public hearing thereon, at which the official shall have the right to be heard, to be represented by counsel, and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. If, after hearing, the accused be found guilty as charged, he or she may be suspended or dismissed from the service of the consolidated government by the affirmative vote of seven (7) members of the Council. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Council and its members shall deal with the executive branch of the consolidated government, including all appointive officers, directors of departments and employees thereof only through the Mayor and any such action by the Council may take the form of an ordinance or resolution. 
Chapter 2. - Legislative Procedure 

Sec. 3-200. - Legislation by ordinance. 
Every official act of the Council which is to become law shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "The Council of Columbus, Georgia, hereby ordains." All other acts of the Council shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by its rules. 
Sec. 3-201. - Manner of introduction, consideration, and passage of ordinances. 
(1)  Every proposed ordinance must be complete and in writing and may be introduced by any member at any meeting of the Council. Every ordinance shall embrace but one (1) subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title, except ordinances making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of debt. 
(2)  Ordinances making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or the issuance of bonds or other obligations and appropriating the money to be raised thereby shall be confined to those subjects respectively. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Council from authorizing in and by the same ordinance, the making of any one (1) public improvement and the issuance of bonds therefor. 
(3)  No ordinance shall be passed and adopted until it has been read at two (2) regular meetings not less than one (1) week apart. The requirement of such reading may be dispensed with at either or both of such meetings by the affirmative vote of six (6) members of the Council. Where the Council determines that a state of emergency exists due to natural disaster, foreign enemies, or civil disobedience, an ordinance may be passed declaring that such emergency exists and such ordinance may be adopted on one (1) reading, effective immediately, and effective prior to advertisement. 
(4)  No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended by its title or section number only, but the new ordinance shall contain the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended. 
(5)  Each proposed ordinance may be read only by title when called for final passage. 
(6)  Voting upon the passage of all ordinances shall be taken by "ayes" and "nays" and the names of the Councilors voting for and against each proposed ordinance or amendment shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the Council. 
(7)  No proposed ordinance shall be adopted except by the affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of the Council. 
(8)  No member of the Council present at any meeting shall be excused from voting upon passage of an ordinance except on matters involving the consideration of the official conduct of such member or when the financial interests of such member are involved. 
Sec. 3-202. - Submission of ordinances to the Mayor. 
(1)  Every ordinance adopted by the Council shall be presented by the clerk to the Mayor for his or her signature as promptly as possible following its adoption. 
(2)  Within five (5) days after such presentation, the Mayor shall return the ordinance to the clerk with or without his or her signature. If the ordinance has been signed by the Mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk; if the ordinance has not been signed, it shall be resubmitted to the Council through the clerk with the Mayor's written motion that the ordinance be reconsidered. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the Mayor. An ordinance penal in nature, providing for punishment or fine, shall become law ten (10) days after it has been signed by the Mayor and returned to the clerk. 
(3)  In the event the Mayor fails to sign the ordinance in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) hereof or does not resubmit the ordinance with his or her written motion for reconsideration as provided in subsection (2) hereof, the ordinance shall become law upon the expiration of said five-day period following its adoption. In the event the Mayor fails to sign an ordinance penal in nature providing for punishment or fine, or does not resubmit such penal ordinance with his or her written motion for reconsideration, the ordinance shall become law upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days following its adoption. 
(4)  Each ordinance resubmitted by the Mayor with his or her written motion for reconsideration shall be presented by the Clerk to the Council at its next regular meeting, and should the Council after discussion on the merits then reaffirm its action by a vote of six (6) members, the ordinance shall become law. An ordinance penal in nature, providing for punishment or fine, reaffirmed by such votes of six (6) members, shall become effective ten (10) days after such vote of reaffirmation. 
Sec. 3-203. - Authentication; recording; effective date. 
All ordinances which have become law shall immediately be deposited in the official archives of the Clerk of Council. The clerk shall note on the face of the ordinance the date and time it has become law and the ordinance shall become effective at noon on the day following its becoming law or at such later time as it may specify. The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature each ordinance which had become law. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the clerk shall cause each ordinance which has become law to be recorded in full in a properly indexed official journal maintained for such purpose. 
Sec. 3-204. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(1)  The Council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(a)  The requirements of Section 3-201(4) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(b)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3-203. 
(2)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3-205. - Codification and printing of ordinances. 
(1)  The Council shall, by October 5, 1974, provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances of a general or permanent nature. Such code shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be published promptly in loose-leaf form, together with All amendments thereto, this Charter, any amendments hereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the Council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "Columbus Georgia Code." As determined by the Council, copies of the Code shall be furnished to officers, departments and agencies; placed in libraries and public offices for public reference; and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
(2)  Copies of ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the Council. Following publication of the first Columbus Georgia Code and from time to time thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. 
Sec. 3-206. - Publication of ordinances by caption only; publication in full. 
The caption of every ordinance showing its general contents shall be published once, within ten (10) days after becoming law, in the newspaper having the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia, and this publication will include notice of the office of consolidated government in which the full text of the ordinance is available for public inspection, except that if the cost of publishing the full text of the ordinance does not exceed ninety-nine dollars ($99.00), the full text and not just the caption shall be published as provided in this section, and no notice of the office in which the full text is available shall then be required to be published. 
Chapter 3. - Council Inquiries and Investigations 

Sec. 3-300. - Inquiries and investigations. 
(1)  The Council shall have the power to conduct or cause to be conducted inquiries and investigations of the operation of any office, department, or agency or the conduct, of any officer or employee thereof administering the affairs of the consolidated government. 
(2)  In conducting inquiries and investigations, the Council shall have the right to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, documents, records or other evidence, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any subpoena shall be issued by the clerk at direction of the Council. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order, subpoena or summons issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall appear before the recorder or recorder pro tem of the recorder's court, who shall hear the reasons or excuses for such failure and the recorder or recorder pro tem shall have authority to impose such punishment as for a contempt as he or she may deem proper, not to exceed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days or both in the discretion of the court, with the right of appeal to the State Court of Columbus, Georgia, as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 3-301. - Investigations to be public. 
All inquiries and investigation conducted by the Council shall be open to the public, except when in the opinion of the Council executive sessions are required. 
Sec. 3-302. - Rights of witnesses and others. 
Any witness appearing before the Council may be represented-by counsel. Any person whose character shall have been impugned in the course of an inquiry or investigation by the Council shall be given the opportunity to appear with or without counsel, to present evidence, to cross-examine witnesses, and to call witnesses of his or her own, and the Council shall, upon application being made, exercise its subpoena power to compel the attendance of such persons and witnesses. 
Sec. 3-303. - Conduct of proceedings. 
The conduct of proceedings at Council inquiries and investigations shall be subject to such rules as the Council may prescribe. 
ARTICLE IV - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
Chapter 1. - Organization and General Provisions 

Sec. 4-100. - Executive powers. 
All executive and administrative powers of the consolidated government shall be vested in and exercised by the executive branch. 
Sec. 4-101. - Organization. 
The executive branch shall consist of the Mayor; the City Officers; the directors of departments; and departments, boards, commissions and authorities ordained by the Council or established by law. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-102. - General provisions concerning departments. 
(1)  The operations and responsibilities of each department in the consolidated government shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided for by ordinance of Council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by ordinance. 
(2)  There shall be a director of each department who shall be the principal officer thereof, except the department of public safety, the director and principal officer of which shall be the Mayor. Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, each director shall, subject to the supervision and direction of the City manager, be responsible for the conduct of the affairs and operations of his or her department and shall exercise general management and control of the several divisions, bureaus or other units of the departments as may be established by ordinance of the Council. 
(3)  All directors of departments shall be appointed and may be removed by the City Manager with the advice and consent of the Council, except where other appointing authority is designated by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the consolidated government shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for an original appointment. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the consolidated government shall be appointed on the basis of their respective executive, administrative and professional qualifications. 
(6)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-103. - General provisions concerning boards, commissions and authorities. 
(1)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the consolidated government shall be appointed by the Council for such term of office and by such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(2)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission and authority of the consolidated government shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(3)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the Clerk of the Council an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the Council and administered by the Mayor. 
(4)  Any member of a board, commission or authority of the consolidated government may be removed from office for cause by a vote of six (6) members of the Council. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided by law, members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation as may be prescribed by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance establish a policy for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by such members in the performance of their official duties. 
Chapter 2. - The Mayor 

Sec. 4-200. - Term; qualification; compensation; election. 
(1)  (A)  The Mayor who is serving as such on January 1, 1993, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such office shall continue to serve as Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(B)  The Mayor of the consolidated government (herein referred to as the "Mayor") shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and shall assume office on the first Monday in January next following his or her election and shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall be elected as provided in Article VI of this Charter. 
(2)  The Mayor shall be a citizen of the United States, shall have been a resident and qualified elector of the consolidated government for at least two (2) years prior to the date of his or her election, and shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age when elected to office. If the Mayor shall cease to be a resident and qualified elector during his or her term of office he or she shall forthwith forfeit the office and the Council shall declare the office vacant. 
(3)  The annual salary of the Mayor shall be fixed by ordinance of Council; provided, however, that such compensation shall not be diminished during his or her term of office. 
Sec. 4-201. - Powers and duties. 
The Mayor shall have the power and the duty: 
(1)  To be the official spokesperson for the consolidated government and its chief advocate of policy, and to see that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the Council and laws of this state, subject to enforcement by the Mayor or by Officers subject to the Mayor's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  To preside at all meetings of the Council and to have a voice in its proceedings; 
(3)  To nominate the City Officers as defined in Section 4-300 below; 
(4)  To have the right to vote only in the case of a tie, and for such purpose only to be deemed a member of the Council; 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (9) hereof, to sign ordinances on their final passage; to sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments and documents in any case in which the execution of legal instruments of legal writing or of other necessity, arising where the general laws of the state, or provisions of this Charter, or ordinance or resolution of the Council so require; 
(6)  To be recognized as the official head of the consolidated government by the courts for the purpose of receiving service of civil process, by the Governor for the purpose of military law and for all ceremonial purposes; 
(7)  To take, with consent of the Council, command of the police and govern the consolidated government by proclamation and maintain order and enforce laws in times of danger or emergency, such consent may be given by an emergency ordinance adopted as set forth in Section 3-201(3) of the Charter, and in the event the President of the United States or the Governor of the State of Georgia declares such emergency to exist, to take command of the police and govern the consolidated government and maintain order and enforce laws until such time as the Council is able to act; 
(8)  To call special meetings of the Council as provided by Article III, Chapter 1, Section 3-103(4) of this Charter; 
(9)  To require reconsideration of ordinances passed by the Council as provided by Article III, Chapter 2, Section 3-202 of this Charter; 
(10)  To submit to the Council the recommended annual operating and capital budget and capital improvement program as required by Article VII, Chapter 4 of this Charter; 
(11)  To conduct studies and to make recommendations to the Council for legislation concerning all matters relating to the consolidated-government and the welfare of its citizens; 
(12)  To represent the consolidated government in its intergovernmental relations, particularly where questions of public policy are at issue; 
(13)  To appoint for his or her information and assistance, advisory boards, commissions, and committees which shall be answerable only to the Mayor, but whose actions shall be advisory in nature; 
(14)  To direct, supervise, and coordinate the administration and activities of the department of public safety; 
(15)  Subject to the approval of six (6) members of the Council, to appoint and remove division heads such as the police and Fire Chief and such other Officers as prescribed by ordinance; 
(16)  To supervise and direct all matters pertaining to civil defense, including civil defense planning, training, coordination, implementation and such other civil defense functions and activities, as required by ordinance; and 
(17)  To perform such other functions and duties as required by law, this Charter, or ordinance, or resolution of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12; HB 415, § 2, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 4-202. - Limitation on terms of service; other elective office. 
Any Mayor who is elected for two (2) consecutive four-year terms shall not be eligible to be elected for the succeeding term. During his or her term of office, the Mayor shall not hold any other elective public office or any appointive position of employment within the consolidated government. 
Sec. 4-203. - Mayor pro tem; powers; duties. 
During the absence or disability of the Mayor for any cause, the Mayor pro tem shall exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties of the Mayor, until such vacancy has been regularly filled or until the return of the Mayor or the removal of the Mayor's disability. In the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor pro tem for any cause, the Council shall designate one (1) of their number to preside over their meetings and discharge the duties of Mayor until either the return or removal of the disability of the Mayor or Mayor pro tem The Councilor who serves as Mayor pro tem shall receive an annual salary equal to the annual salary of Councilors plus such additional compensation as may be fixed from time to time by ordinance of the Council. 
Chapter 3. - City Officers 
Subchapter A. - City Officers 

Sec. 4-300. - Definition. 
The City Officers of Columbus, Georgia shall consist of the City Manager, the City Attorney, the Chief of the Columbus Police Department, the Chief of the Columbus Fire and EMS Department and the Warden of the Muscogee County Prison, all of whom shall be responsible to and accountable to the Mayor of Columbus, Georgia, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, by Georgia law or by Rules of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-301. - Residence. 
The residency requirement contained in Chapter 3 of this Charter shall only be applicable prospectively to City Officers appointed after the effective date of these amendments to the Charter. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter B. - City Manager 

Sec. 4-305. - Appointment and removal. 
The City Manager shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-201(3) of Chapter 2 of this Article. The City Manager shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-335 of this Chapter. Vacancies occurring in the office of the City Manager shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed in Chapter 2 for original appointment. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-306. - Residence and compensation. 
The City Manager need not be a resident of Columbus, Georgia at the time of his or her appointment, but must become a resident of Columbus, Georgia within ninety (90) days thereafter and maintain such residency during his or her term in office. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as fixed by ordinance of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-307. - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager, under and subject to the direction of the Mayor shall: 
(1)  With the advice and consent of the Council, appoint and remove all heads of departments in the administrative service of the consolidated government who are subject to his or her control and direction as provided for by this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter and by ordinance; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the consolidated government except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or ordinance; 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the Mayor the annual operating and capital budget and capital improvement program; 
(4)  Submit to the Mayor and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the consolidated government as of the end of each fiscal year and at such other times as the Mayor may direct; 
(5)  Prepare and make such other reports concerning the operations of departments, offices and agencies of the consolidated government subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision as may be required by the Mayor or by the Council; 
(6)  Keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the consolidated government and make such recommendations to the Mayor and the Council concerning the affairs of the government as he or she deems desirable; 
(7)  Have care and custody of all buildings and of all real and personal property of the government; 
(8)  Direct and supervise the administration of the construction, maintenance, and operation of public streets, roads, bridges, drains and buildings and other public works; 
(9)  Confer with and assist the directors of all departments, such as the department of health and department of family and children services whose responsibilities and activities are not under direct control and jurisdiction of the Council, but who are dependent upon appropriations therefrom; 
(10)  Confer with and advise all elected and appointed officials of the consolidated government who are not under the immediate control or jurisdiction of the Council but who receive financial support therefrom, such as sheriff, tax commissioner, clerk of courts, and probate judge; 
(11)  At least annually, examine accounts, records and operations of every board, commission, authority, department, office and agency which receive appropriations [from] the Council; 
(12)  Provide general liaison between the Mayor, the Council and all departments, boards, commissions and employees of the consolidated government; 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, ordinance, or resolution of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter C. - City Attorney 

Sec. 4-310. - Appointment and removal. 
The City Attorney shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-201(3) of Chapter 2 of this Article. The City Attorney shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-335 of this Chapter. Vacancies occurring in the office of the City Attorney shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed in Chapter 2 for original appointment. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-311. - Residence and compensation. 
The City Attorney need not be a resident of Columbus, Georgia at the time of his or her appointment, but must become a resident of Columbus, Georgia within ninety (90) days thereafter and maintain such residency during his or her term of office. The City Attorney must be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing, and shall have had at least five (5) years' experience in active practice of the law. The compensation of the City Attorney shall be fixed by ordinance of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-312. - Powers and duties. 
The City Attorney shall: 
(1)  Act as the legal adviser to and attorney and counsel to the consolidated government and all its officers in matters relating to their official duties; 
(2)  Prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the consolidated government is concerned and shall endorse on each approval of the form and correctness thereof, and no such written contract with the consolidated government shall take effect until the approval of the City Attorney is endorsed thereon; 
(3)  Be the primary prosecutor in the recorder's court; 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, ordinance, or resolution of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter D. - Chief of Police of Columbus, Georgia 

Sec. 4-320. - Appointment. 
The Chief of Police of Columbus, Georgia ("Police Chief") shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-201(3) of Chapter 2 of this Article. The Chief of Police of Columbus, Georgia shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 4-335 of this Chapter. Vacancies occurring in the office of the Chief of Police of Columbus, Georgia shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed in Chapter 2 for original appointment. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-321. - Residence and compensation. 
The Police Chief need not be a resident of Columbus, Georgia at the time of his or her appointment, but must become a resident of Columbus, Georgia within ninety (90) days thereafter and maintain such residency during his or her term of office. The compensation of the Police Chief shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-322. - Powers and duties. 
The Police Chief under and subject to the direction of the Mayor shall: 
(1)  Be the chief executive officer of the Columbus Police Department. The Police Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor for the overall operations of the department. The Chief of Police is the ranking officer of the department and shall have authority over all personnel, sworn, and non-sworn, within the department. 
(2)  Be responsible for the selection, training, assignment and promotion of all personnel. The Chief of Police of Columbus, Georgia shall have the authority to discipline, including the termination of any department personnel. 
(3)  Be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and to establish policy and procedure governing the conduct of departmental employees and the activities and operations of the Police Department. The Police Chief is responsible for the fiscal management of the department and shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the Mayor and City Manager, as directed. 
(4)  Be authorized to delegate any of the responsibilities of the office to any of his or her subordinates within the Police Department. 
(5)  Perform such duties as are required by law or ordinance. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter E. - Chief of Columbus Fire and EMS Department 

Sec. 4-325. - Appointment. 
The chief of the Columbus Fire and EMS Department ("Fire Chief") shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-201(3) of Chapter 2 of this Article. The Fire Chief shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-335 of this Chapter. Vacancies occurring in the office of the Fire Chief shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed in Chapter 2 for original appointment. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-326. - Residence and compensation. 
The Fire Chief need not be a resident of Columbus, Georgia at the time of his or her appointment, but must become a resident of Columbus, Georgia within ninety (90) days thereafter and maintain such residency during his or her term of office. The compensation of the Fire Chief shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-327. - Powers and duties. 
The Fire Chief under and subject to the direction of the Mayor shall: 
(1)  Be in charge of the Columbus Fire and EMS Department and shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Columbus Fire and EMS Department. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor for the overall operations of the department. The Fire Chief is the ranking officer of the department and shall have authority over all personnel, sworn, and non-sworn, within the department. 
(2)  Be responsible for the selection, hiring, training, assignment, and appointment of all personnel. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to discipline, including the termination of any departmental personnel. 
(3)  Be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and to establish policies and procedures governing the conduct of departmental employees and the activities and operation of the Columbus Fire and EMS Department. The Fire Chief is responsible for the fiscal management of the department and shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the Mayor and City Manager, as directed. 
(4)  Be authorized to delegate any of the responsibilities of the office to any of his or her subordinates within the Fire and EMS Department. 
(5)  Be empowered to assign personnel as needed within the department. 
(6)  Have general control and supervision of all the equipment and all of the members of the department and shall be responsible for the condition and efficiency of the same and shall be in full command of all members of the department. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter F. - Warden of the Muscogee County Prison 

Sec. 4-330. - Appointment. 
The Warden of Muscogee County Prison ("the Warden") shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-201(3) of Chapter 2 of this Article. The Warden shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-335 of this Chapter. Vacancies occurring in the office of the Warden shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed in Chapter 2 for original appointment. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-331. - Residence and Compensation. 
The Warden need not be a resident of Columbus, Georgia at the time of his or her appointment, but must become a resident of Columbus, Georgia within ninety (90) days thereafter and maintain such residency during his or her term of office. The compensation of the Warden shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-332. - Powers and duties. 
The Warden of Muscogee County Prison under and subject to the direction of the Mayor shall: 
(1)  apply the rules of the Georgia Department of Corrections governing the conduct and control of inmates to all inmates housed or incarcerated at the Muscogee County Prison. 
(2)  be charged with the responsibility of administering these rules for city-county inmates in the same manner that he or she administers said rules for state inmates. The Warden of Muscogee County Prison shall maintain a current copy of said rules of the Muscogee County Prison. 
(3)  be responsible for the fiscal management of the department and shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the Mayor and City Manager, as directed. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Subchapter G. - Dismissal and Approval 

Sec. 4-335. - Dismissal of City Officer. 
Any City Officer named in this chapter may be dismissed as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor may recommend the removal and dismissal of any City Officer. The affected City Officer shall be served with written notice of his or her removal and given an opportunity to be heard by the Columbus Council. Such removal and dismissal shall be effective when confirmed by the affirmative vote of six (6) members of the Council. 
(2)  The Mayor may remove, dismiss and discharge any City Officer. Such dismissal shall be effective immediately subject to the affected City Officer's right to appeal such action by the Mayor as provided in Section 4-336 of this subchapter. 
(3)  The Council, without a recommendation of the Mayor, may remove, dismiss and discharge any City Officer with the affirmative vote of seven (7) members of Columbus Council voting in favor of such removal, dismissal or discharge. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 4-336. - Appeal of dismissal by City Officer. 
Any City Officer who, pursuant to Section 4-335(2) is removed, dismissed or discharged from his or her position as an officer of the City of Columbus shall have the right to appeal such removal, dismissal or discharge to the Columbus Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of Council within ten (10) days from the date of such removal, dismissal or discharge. Such affected City Official shall have the right to a public hearing before the Columbus Council within twenty (20) days from the date of filing such notice of appeal. Upon completion of the hearing before the Columbus Council, the removal, dismissal or discharge of any such City Officer must be overruled by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of Columbus Council or the decision stands. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Chapter 6. - Boards, Commissions, and Authorities: Functions 
Subchapter A. - Departmental 

Sec. 4-600. - Board of water commissioners; laws continued in force; terms construed. 
(1)  On the effective date of this Charter, the board of water commissioners established pursuant to an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved December 3, 1902 (Ga. L. 1902, p. 370), as amended, shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter and said Act as now or hereafter amended is hereby continued in unimpaired force and effect; provided, however, that as used in said Act the terms "City of Columbus" or "Muscogee County" shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia, and the term "Mayor and board of aldermen" shall mean Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(2)  The Council of the consolidated government shall be authorized to redefine the manner of appointment, membership and powers and duties of said board of water commissioners after the expiration of a period of eighteen (18) months following October 5, 1971. At such time, the Council shall also be authorized to modify, change or repeal any or all of the provisions of the Act of the General Assembly, approved December 3, 1902. 
Sec. 4-601. - Board of health; redesignation; application of law; terms construed. 
On October 5, 1971, the county board of health established by virtue of an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 27, 1941 (Ga. L. 1941, p. 937), as amended, and pursuant to an amendment to Paragraph VI, Section I, Article XI of the Constitution of Georgia, as amended (Ga. L. 1947, p. 1780), shall be redesignated as the board of health of Columbus, Georgia, and it shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. As of that date, the provisions of the Act establishing said board of health shall continue in unimpaired force and effect and shall apply to the consolidated government; except as used in said Act, the terms "City of Columbus" or "Muscogee County" shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia; the term "chairman of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Muscogee County" shall mean Mayor of Columbus, Georgia; the term "City Commissioners" shall mean Council of Columbus, Georgia; and the term "county board of health" shall mean Columbus Board of Health. 
Sec. 4-602. - Board of family and children services; redesignation; application of law; terms construed. 
On October 5, 1971, the board of family and children services of Muscogee County, established pursuant to an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 26, 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 355), as amended, shall be redesignated as the board of family and children services of Columbus, Georgia, and said board, as herein redesignated, shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. As of that date, the provisions of an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 26, 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 355), as amended, and as may hereafter be amended, shall apply to the consolidated government. As used in said Act, as amended, or as may hereafter be amended, the term "county" shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia, and the terms "county commissioner" or "board of commissioners" shall be construed to include the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Subchapter B. - Attached To Departments 

Sec. 4-610. - Personnel review board. 
(1)  The personnel review board shall make recommendations on personnel rules and regulations; hear appeals from employees under procedures established by ordinance of the Council pertaining to significant disciplinary actions as defined by ordinance of the Council; and perform such other functions and duties as may be required by ordinance. 
(2)  Pursuant to the authority of Code Section 36-1-21 of the O.C.G.A., the personnel review board shall hear appeals by employees of elected County Officers and employees of other commissions, boards, or bodies of the county when said County Officers or commissions or boards or bodies make written application for the inclusion of their employees in the merit system of the consolidated government, and such appeals shall be heard under the provisions of the Columbus Personnel Regulations or under such other provisions as may be ordained by the Council. 
(3)  The personnel review board shall consist of five (5) regular members and five (5) alternate members. Each alternate member shall be designated as the alternate for a particular regular member. In the absence of any regular member, the alternate so designated for his or her place shall sit as a substitute for said absent member and shall be empowered to act as a regular member until such time as the proceedings begun in the absence of the regular member are concluded. 
(HB 416, § 1, 2-16-13) 
Secs. 4-611—4-613. - Reserved. 
Subchapter C. - Nondepartmental 

Sec. 4-620. - Housing authority (reserved) 
Sec. 4-621. - Hospital authority; redesignation; application of law; terms construed. 
On October 5, 1971, the hospital authority of Muscogee County shall be redesignated as the hospital authority of Columbus, Georgia, and it shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. As of that date, the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 7 of Title 31 of the O.C.G.A., the "Hospital Authorities Law," as now or hereafter amended, shall apply to the consolidated government. As used in said article, as amended, or as may hereafter be amended, the term "authority" shall be construed to include the hospital authority of Columbus, Georgia; the term "governing body" shall be construed to include the Council of Columbus, Georgia; and the term "area of operations" shall be construed to include the area within but not limited to the territorial limits of Columbus, Georgia. Any and all agreements made by such authority are hereby approved and ratified, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all bonds and notes or other monetary commitments issued or made by such authority and including any and all agreements made by such authority with the federal government, or any agency thereof, or the state government or any agency thereof, pertaining in any way to the functions of such authority. By this section the corporate existence, functions and powers of the hospital authority of Columbus, Georgia, are hereby expressly recognized and continued in unimpaired force and effect until abolished as herein provided. The Council may, by ordinance, abolish the hospital authority within a period of five (5) years following October 5, 1971, and transfer all the powers and functions of such authority to a department or instrumentality of the consolidated government which shall have the power and its duty shall be to perform and exercise all the functions and powers theretofore performed and exercised by the hospital authority under Article 4 of Chapter 7 of Title 31 of the O.C.G.A., the "Hospital Authorities Law," as amended. 
Sec. 4-622. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-623. - Industrial and port development commission. 
(1)  There is hereby created for Columbus, Georgia, an agency to be known as the "Columbus Industrial and Port Development Commission." Said Commission shall be a separate public entity and a public corporation. 
(2)  The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, and they shall serve for a term of five (5) years and may be reappointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the said Council. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, and a majority may act for the Commission in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Commission to act. 
(3)  On October 5, 1971, the Muscogee County Industrial Development Authority, created by an amendment to Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended, and as ratified at the general election held on November 5, 1968 (Ga. L. 1967, p. 947), shall stand abolished. Thereupon, the Columbus Industrial and Port Development Authority created by this section shall succeed, replace, and have the powers and duties in every respect and shall perform every function as were formerly possessed and performed by the Muscogee County Industrial Development Authority and all rights, privileges, obligations and powers heretofore vested therein by said constitutional amendment (Ga. L. 1967, p. 947) are hereby transferred to and vested in the Columbus Industrial and Port Development Commission and to such extent said constitutional amendment is continued in unimpaired force and effect. 
(4)  On October 5, 1971, the Muscogee County Port Development Commission, created pursuant to an amendment to Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, as amended, and as ratified at the general election held on November 8, 1966, (Ga. L. 1965, p. 702), shall stand abolished. Thereupon the Columbus Industrial and Port Development Commission created by this section shall succeed, replace, and have the powers and duties in every respect and shall perform every function as were formerly possessed and performed by the Muscogee County Port Development Commission, and all rights, privileges, obligations and powers heretofore vested therein by said constitutional amendment (Ga. L. 1965, p. 702) are hereby transferred to and vested in the Columbus Industrial and Port Development Commission and to such extent said constitutional amendment is continued in unimpaired force and effect. 
(5)  Property, real or personal, acquired, constructed, equipped or installed from the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued by the Commission shall not be exempt from ad valorem property taxation without the approval of the Council, and in the event such property shall be owned by the Commission, the person, firm or corporation leasing such property from the Commission shall make payments to Columbus, Georgia, in lieu of ad valorem property taxes which would have been owed had the property been owned by such person, firm or corporation, unless such payment shall be waived by the Council. The revenue bonds of the Commission, their transfer and the income therefore (therefrom) shall at all times be exempt from taxation within the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 4-624. - Board of tax assessors. 
There is created a board of tax assessors for the consolidated government, which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Council for six-year staggered terms of office as specified by ordinance of the Council. It shall be the duty of the board to equalize and assess tax returns on all, property, real, and personal, in Columbus, Georgia, subject to taxation, in such manner as to provide that each property owner will pay a tax in proportion to the value of his, her, or its property. The board of tax assessors shall perform such functions as are conferred upon county boards of tax assessors generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia, and it shall exercise and perform such other powers, functions, and duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the Council. The board shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and its members shall receive such compensation as fixed by ordinance of the Council. No person shall hold or perform the duties of tax assessor unless his or her qualifications shall meet the requirements established by Code Section 48-5-291 of the O.C.G.A. 
Secs. 4-625, 4-626. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-627. - Airport commission; redesignation; application of law; terms construed. 
(1)  The Muscogee County airport commission created by an amendment to Article V, Section IV, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, as amended, and ratified at the general election held on November 5, 1968 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 1655) is hereby redesignated as the Columbus airport commission which shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and except as herein provided, the provisions of said constitutional amendment shall continue in unimpaired force and effect, except that as used in said amendment the term "County of Muscogee" shall mean Columbus, Georgia; and the term "Muscogee County airport commission" shall mean Columbus airport commission; the term "board of commissioners of Muscogee County" shall mean Council of Columbus, Georgia; and the term "clerk of commissioners" shall mean the Clerk of Council of the consolidated government; provided, however, the Council may, by ordinance within a period of five (5) years following October 5, 1971, transfer the administrative and operational powers and functions of the commission to the department of transportation under this charter. 
Sec. 4-628. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-629. - Columbus building authority. 
The Columbus and Muscogee County building commission created by an amendment to Article VII, Section VI, Paragraph I of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended and ratified at the general election held on November 5, 1968 (Ga. L. 1966, p, 946), is hereby redesignated as the Columbus building authority which shall continue its operations notwithstanding the adoption of this Charter, and said constitutional amendment is hereby continued in unimpaired force and effect; provided, however, that as used in said amendment the term "Mayor and commissioners of the City of Columbus" shall be construed to mean the Council of Columbus, Georgia; the term "commissioners of roads and revenues of Muscogee County" shall mean the Council of Columbus, Georgia; the terms "Mayor of the City of Columbus" and "Muscogee County" shall mean Columbus, Georgia. 
ARTICLE V - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
Chapter 1. - Superior Court 

Sec. 5-100. - Unaffected by Charter. 
The Superior Court of Muscogee County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. 
Chapter 2. - Probate Court 

Sec. 5-200. - Unaffected by Charter. 
The Probate Court of Muscogee County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. 
Chapter 3. - State Court 

Sec. 5-300. - Redesignation. 
The City Court of Columbus, created by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved December 20, 1884 (Ga. L. 1884-85, p. 455), as now or hereafter amended, and which by the charter of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, was named "City Court of Columbus, Georgia," shall be and is hereby designated as "State Court of Columbus, Georgia," and wherever the term "City Court of Columbus" shall appear in said Act and all amendatory Acts thereof, it shall be construed to mean the State Court of Columbus, Georgia. 
Sec. 5-301. - Laws continued in force; terms construed. 
Said court, as herein redesignated, shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter and the Act creating said court approved December 20, 1884 (Ga. L. 1884-85, p. 455, et seq.), and all Acts amendatory thereof are hereby continued in unimpaired force and effect, except that as used in said Act and any amendments thereof, the terms "City of Columbus" and "County of Muscogee" or "Muscogee County" shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia. 
Chapter 4. - Municipal Court 

Sec. 5-400. - Redesignation. 
On October 5, 1971, the municipal court of the City of Columbus, created by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved August 12, 1915 (Ga. L. 1915, p. 63), as now or hereafter amended, shall be redesignated as the municipal court of Columbus, Georgia, so that wherever the term "Municipal Court of Columbus," shall appear in said Act and all amendatory Acts thereof, it shall be construed to mean the municipal court of Columbus, Georgia. 
Sec. 5-401. - Laws continued in force; terms construed. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the municipal court as herein redesignated shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter and said Act creating said court (Ga. L. 1915, p. 63) and all amendatory Acts thereof are hereby continued in unimpaired force and effect. As used in said Act and all amendatory Acts thereof the terms "City of Columbus" and "County of Muscogee" or "Muscogee County" shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia; and the term "commissioners of roads and revenues of Muscogee County, Georgia" shall be construed to mean the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
Sec. 5-402. - Jurisdiction. 
(1)  The municipal court of Columbus, Georgia shall have jurisdiction throughout the territorial limits of the consolidated government, concurrent with the Superior Court, to try and dispose of all civil cases or proceedings, of whatever nature, whether arising ex contractu or ex delicto, under the common law or by statute, in which the principal sum claimed to be due or the value of the property in dispute does not exceed the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and of which jurisdiction is not now vested by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia exclusively in other courts, which jurisdiction shall include, concurrent with the Superior Court, the right and power to try and determine finally all dispossessory warrant and eviction cases, where proper pleadings are filed and returns made to said municipal court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(2)  The criminal jurisdiction of the municipal court of Columbus, Georgia, shall remain as authorized by law prior to the effective date of this Charter. 
Chapter 5. - Juvenile Court 

Sec. 5-500. - Unaffected by Charter; laws continued in force. 
On the effective date of this Charter, the juvenile court of Muscogee County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. The provisions of an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 19, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 291), as amended, or as may hereafter be amended, or any future act of the General Assembly of Georgia relating to the procedures, powers and jurisdiction of juvenile courts shall apply to the juvenile court of Columbus, Georgia to the extent not in conflict with this Charter. The term "county" as used in said Act, or as may be used in any future such act, shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia. 
Chapter 6. - Recorder's Court 

Sec. 5-600. - Redesignation; laws continued in force. 
On October 5, 1971, the Mayor's court of the City of Columbus established pursuant to an Act of the General Assembly approved November 29, 1890 (Ga. L. 1890-1691, Vol. Two, p. 469), as amended, and continued as the police court of said city by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia approved August 5, 1921, (Ga. L. 1921, p. 823), as amended, shall be redesignated as the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia so that wherever the term "Mayor's Court" appears in said Act and all amendatory Acts thereof, it shall be construed to mean the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia. Said court, as herein renamed shall continue its operation without interruption resulting from the adoption of the Charter and except as otherwise provided by this Charter, those provisions of the Act continuing said court (Ga. L. 1921, p. 823), as now or hereafter amended, are hereby continued in unimpaired force and effect. As used in the provisions of said Act continuing said court, the term "Mayor's Court of the City of Columbus" shall be construed to mean the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia; the term "City Commission" shall mean the Council of Columbus, Georgia; the term "Mayor and council" shall mean Council of Columbus, Georgia; and the term "commissioners" shall mean Council of Columbus, Georgia; and the term "Mayor" shall mean Mayor of Columbus, Georgia. 
Sec. 5-601. - Jurisdiction. 
The recorder's court shall continue with all the rights, authority, power and jurisdiction now possessed under all present laws applicable to said court; and in addition thereto, the recorder's court shall be and is hereby empowered and authorized and given jurisdiction to accept pleas of guilty or nolo contendere and to impose punishment and penalties provided by laws of the State of Georgia, but not greater than the penalties and punishment the recorder's court may now or hereafter be authorized to impose for violations of ordinances, in cases involving defendants charged with violating any and all criminal laws of the State of Georgia relating to traffic upon the public roads, streets and highways of this state; violations of the laws of the State of Georgia contained in Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., as now amended and as hereafter amended by the State of Georgia; violations of the laws of the State of Georgia requiring the registration and licensing of motor vehicles as required by Chapter 2 of Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., as now amended and as hereafter amended by the State of Georgia; and violations of laws of the State of Georgia relating to motor vehicle drivers' licenses as contained in Chapter 5 of Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., as now amended and as hereafter amended by the State of Georgia and all other state laws relating to motor vehicle drivers' licenses; where the penalty for these offenses does not exceed that of the grade of misdemeanors, where a preliminary hearing is waived in writing by the accused and a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is entered by the accused in writing. The jurisdiction and powers of the recorder's court shall extend throughout the territory of the consolidated government. 
Sec. 5-602. - Appeal bond; trial de novo. 
Any person or persons found guilty by the recorder upon a plea of not guilty, when charged in violation of an ordinance of the consolidated government, shall have the right of appeal to the State Court of Muscogee County from the recorder's court in the same manner and under the same procedure as now prescribed by law for such appeals. 
(HB 415, § 3, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 5-603. - Appointment of recorders and recorders pro tem. 
On October 5, 1971, any incumbent recorders and recorders pro tem who were serving as recorders or recorders pro tem in the former City of Columbus shall continue to serve in that office for a term of four (4) years. Any incumbent recorders or recorders pro tem shall be eligible for reappointment by the Council of the consolidated government upon the expiration of such term. The Council shall be authorized to appoint such recorders or recorders pro tem for a term of four (4) years, as they deem necessary to efficiently conduct the duties of the recorder's court. 
Sec. 5-604. - Term; qualification; compensation. 
The term of office of recorders and recorders pro tem shall be four (4) years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. A recorder or recorder pro tem shall be not less than thirty (30) years of age, an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing, a resident of the territory of the consolidated government, and shall have practiced law for a period of not less than five (5) years prior to the commencement of the duties of office. Compensation of the recorders and recorders pro tem shall be fixed by the Council. 
Sec. 5-605. - Rules; procedures; personnel. 
The Council shall, by ordinance, fix rules and regulations governing the time, place, and number of sessions of the court. The court shall have a clerk and one (1) or more clerks pro tempore who shall prepare the court dockets, maintain all court records, and serve as the court's Chief Administrative Officer. 
Sec. 5-606. - [Department of Transportation/METRA to have jurisdiction to collect fines from uncontested parking citations.] 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions contained in this Chapter, the Department of Transportation/METRA shall have jurisdiction to collect fines from uncontested parking citations for violations of ordinances regulating parking in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 00-86, § 1, 9-12-00) 
ARTICLE VI - ELECTION AND RECALL 
Chapter 1. - Representation: General Provisions 

Sec. 6-100. - Regular elections; time for holding voting. 
(1)  The regular election of the consolidated government shall be held on the Tuesday next following first Monday in November in each even-numbered year. Except for special elections to fill vacancies in office, all officers who are required by this charter to be elected shall be elected at the regular election of the consolidated government. 
(2)  The entire electorate of the consolidated government shall be entitled to vote in the elections for Mayor and Councilors at Large. The Mayor and Councilors at large shall be residents of the consolidated government. Each District Councilor shall be a resident of the Council District he or she represents and shall be elected only by the voters of the district he or she represents. 
Sec. 6-101. - Council districts. 
(1)  For the purpose of electing the District Councilors, the territory of the consolidated government shall be divided into eight (8) Council Districts as designated by the decennial districting commission provided for in Section 6- 102 and approved by Columbus Council. (Ref. of 11-6-12) 
(2)  (a)  At the regular election in 1994, the mayor shall be elected and the members shall be elected to the council from Council Districts l, 3, 5, and 7 and the at-large member shall be elected to Post 9. From the commencement of their terms of office as provided in subsection (2) of Section 3-100 and until the expiration of the terms of members elected to the council in 1992, the council shall consist of the five (5) members elected at the 1994 regular election as provided in this paragraph and the five (5) members elected to the council in 1992 or any successor to such a member who is filling a vacancy for an unexpired term. 
(b)  At the regular election in 1996, members shall be elected to the council from Council Districts 2, 4, 6, and 8 and the at large member shall be elected to Post 10. From the commencement of their terms of office as provided in subsection (2) of Section 3-100 and thereafter, the council shall consist of eight (8) district councilors and two (2) councilors at large. 
(c)  The mayor and the members elected to the council as provided for in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection and their respective successors shall be elected at the general election held immediately preceding the expiration of their respective terms of office. 
Sec. 6-102. - Reapportionment of Council Districts. 
(1)  The final grand jury of each decennial year shall nominate four (4) registered voters from each of the eight (8) Council Districts as nominees to comprise a districting commission. The Mayor and the Council shall each appoint one (1) member of the districting commission from the nominees submitted by the grand jury for each Council District. The voters chosen shall neither hold any elective office nor be employed by the consolidated government in any capacity. In the event of vacancy in office of a member of the commission for any cause, the vacancy shall be filled in the manner for original appointment. The Judge of Probate Court shall be an ex officio member of the districting commission, with the same voting rights, privileges and duties as other members thereof. 
(2)  Within six (6) months, after the publication of each federal census of population of Columbus, Georgia, the districting commission shall file with the Council a report containing a recommended plan for reapportionment of the Council District boundaries to comply with the following specifications: 
(a)  Each district shall be formed of contiguous, and to the extent reasonably possible, compact territory, and its boundary lines shall be the center lines of streets or other well-defined boundaries; and 
(b)  Each district shall contain as nearly as is reasonable the same population. 
The report shall include a map and description of the districts recommended and shall be drafted as a proposed ordinance. Once filed with the clerk, the report shall be treated as an ordinance introduced by a Council member. 
(3)  The procedure for the Council's consideration of the report shall be the same as for other ordinances, provided that the provisions of Section 3-206 of this Charter pertaining to publications shall require both the map and the description of the recommended districts to be published. 
(4)  The Council shall enact a redistricting ordinance within six months after receiving such report. If the Council fails to enact a redistricting ordinance within such six (6) months, the redistricting plan submitted by the districting commission shall become effective without enactment by the Council, as if it were a duly enacted ordinance. 
(5)  Such redistricting ordinance shall not apply to any primary or regular or special election held within six (6) months after its becoming effective. No incumbent Councilor or member of a board or commission shall be deprived of his or her unexpired term of office because of such redistricting. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12; HB 415, § 4, 4-24-13) 
Chapter 2. - Conduct of Elections 

Section 6-200. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, regular and special primaries and elections shall be conducted in accordance with provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as amended. Pursuant to the authority of Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A., elections for Mayor and Council of the Consolidated Government shall be conducted in nonpartisan primaries and elections. As used in said Code, the terms, "election" and "general election" shall be construed to include the term "regular election" as provided in Section 6-100 of this charter; the term "governing authority" shall include the Council, of Columbus, Georgia; the terms "municipal," "municipality" or "county" shall include Columbus, Georgia; the term "public office" shall include elective offices of the consolidated government." 
(Ga. Law 1994, Act. No. 941, § 1) 
Sec. 6-201. - Special elections. 
In the event the office of mayor or councilor shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, then such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided for in this section. If a vacancy occurs within one and one-half years after the date of a regular election for the office of mayor or councilor, then the board of elections shall, within ten days after the occurrence of such vacancy, call a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office by giving notice in one or more newspapers of general circulation including the newspaper with the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia. If vacancy occurs more than one and one-half years after the date of a regular election for the office of mayor or councilor, then a person shall be appointed by a majority vote of the total membership of the Council to serve until a successor is elected and qualified at a special election held concurrently with the next regular election for the office of mayor or councilor. The successor elected at such special election shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term of such office. The special election required herein shall be held on the date specified in the advertisement, but not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days after the publication of the call of the election. In all other respects, every special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with those provisions of the applicable laws of Georgia as provided in Section 6-200 of this Charter. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12; HB 415, § 5, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 6-202. - Automatic recount. 
Whenever the difference between the number of votes received by a candidate who has been declared elected to an office in a regular or special election and the number of votes received by any other candidate or candidates not declared so elected shall be not more than one (1) percent of the total votes which were cast for such office therein, the losing candidate may request a recount pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-495(c)(1). 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Chapter 4. - Initiative and Referendum 

Sec. 6-400. - Petition for enactment; circulation; etc. 
(1)  Any proposed ordinances, including ordinances for the repeal or amendment of any ordinance then in effect, may be submitted to the Council by petition signed by at least five (5) percent of the total number of registered voters in the consolidated government as shown by the official registration list filed for the regular election of Councilors last held. All petitions circulated with respect to any proposed ordinance shall be uniform in character, shall contain the proposed ordinance in full, and shall have printed or written thereon the names and addresses of at least five (5) qualified voters who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition and shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the purpose hereinafter named. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink or indelible pencil and shall place on the petition opposite his or her name the date of his or her signature and his or her place of residence by street and number. The signatures of any such petition need not all be appended to one (1) paper, but to each paper there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers to such part of the petition and that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant on the date indicated. 
(2)  All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the clerk as one (1) instrument within sixty (60) days from the date of the first signature thereon; and when so filed, the clerk shall submit the same to the Council at its next regular meeting and provisions shall be made for public hearings upon the proposed ordinance. 
(3)  The Council shall at once proceed to consider such petition and shall take final action thereon within 30 days from the date of submission. If the Council rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a different form from that set forth in the petition, or fails to act finally upon it within the time stated, then, if within five days thereafter the committee of the petitioners files with the clerk written demand so to do, the clerk shall at once upon the expiration of such five days cause three printed or typewritten copies of such petition, without the signatures, to be made. The clerk shall cause such three copies of such petition to be placed on file in the clerk's office, and provide facilities for their signing the same, and shall immediately cause notice of the placing of such copies of such petition to be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation including the newspaper with the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia. Such copies shall remain on file in the office of the clerk for a period of 20 days, during which time any of them may be signed by a qualified voter of the consolidated government in person, but not by agent or attorney. Each signer of any such copy shall sign his or her name in ink or indelible pencil and shall place thereafter his or her residence by street and number. If during such time qualified voters equal to or exceeding 25 percent of the qualified voters in the consolidated government as shown by the official registration list filed for the regular election of councilors last held shall sign such copies of such petition, the clerk shall forthwith certify such fact to the Council. 
(4)  If an election is to be held not more than three (3) months nor less than thirty (30) days after the aforesaid certification by the clerk, such proposed ordinance shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters at such election. If no election is to be held within the time aforesaid, the Council shall provide for submitting the proposed ordinance to the qualified voters at a special election to be held not later than sixty (60) days nor earlier than thirty (30) days after the publication, of such notice on a date authorized under Code Section 21-2-540 of the O.C.G.A., if the petition for such ordinances and the petition for such election so demand, and if the signers of the said copies of said petition amount in the aggregate to at least thirty (30) percent of the registered voters of the consolidated government; otherwise the same shall be submitted at the next regular or special election. At least ten (10) days before any such election the clerk shall cause such proposed ordinance to be published. 
(5)  The ballots used when voting upon and such proposed ordinance shall be the ordinance to be voted on and below it the two (2) propositions, "For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance," Voting shall be conducted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-284 and O.C.G.A. § 21-2-285. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the consolidated government. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12; HB 415, § 6, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 6-401. - Approval of ordinance form; drafting. 
Before any ordinance so proposed shall be submitted to the Council, it shall first be approved as to its form and legal validity by the City Attorney, whose duty it shall be to draft such proposed ordinance in the proper legal language and to render such other service to persons desiring to propose such ordinances as shall be necessary to make the same proper for consideration of the Council. 
Sec. 6-402. - Effect; manner of repealing. 
No ordinance adopted by an electoral vote as hereinbefore provided can be repealed or amended except by an electoral vote. But an ordinance to repeal or amend any such ordinances may, by resolution of the Council, be submitted to an electoral vote at any regular election, or at any special election called for some other purpose, provided notice of the intention so to do be published by the Council not more than sixty (60) days nor less than thirty (30) days prior to such election. If an amendment is proposed such notice shall contain the proposed amendment in full. Such submission shall be in the same manner and the vote shall have the same effect as in cases of ordinances submitted to an election by popular petition. 
Sec. 6-403. - Repeal by referendum; petition; contents; filing. 
(1)  If, at any time within thirty (30) days after an ordinance passed by the Council becomes law, an unsigned petition requesting that such ordinance be repealed or amended as stated in the petition is filed with the clerk, and said petition after the filing of the same and within said thirty (30) days, is signed by qualified voters amounting to or exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the qualified voters as shown by the official registration list filed for the regular election of Councilors last held, the clerk shall thereupon certify said fact to the Council, and the ordinance shall no longer be operative until the steps indicated herein have been taken. Such petition shall have stated therein the names and addresses of at least five (5) qualified voters as a committee to represent the petitioners. Referendum petitions need not contain the text of the ordinance or ordinances the repeal of which is sought, but shall contain the proposed amendment, if an amendment is demanded, and shall be subject in all other respects to the requirements for petitions submitting proposed ordinances to, the Council. Ballots used in referendum elections shall conform in all respects to those provided for in Section 6-400(5) herein. 
(2)  At the next meeting of the Council after said certification by the clerk, the Council shall proceed to reconsider the ordinance. If within thirty (30) days after the date of such certification by the clerk, the ordinance is not repealed or amended as requested, the Council shall provide for submitting the proposed repeal or amendment to a vote of the qualified voters, provided a majority of the committee named in the petition to represent the petitioners shall, by writing filed with the clerk within twenty (20) days after the expiration of said thirty (30) days, so require. In so doing the Council shall be governed by the provisions of Section 6-400(4) herein respecting the time of submission and the manner of voting on ordinances proposed to the Council by petition. If, when submitted to a vote of the qualified voters, such repeal or amendment is approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall thereupon go into effect as an ordinance of the consolidated government; but if any such amendment is clearly separable from the remainder of the ordinance and does not materially affect the other provisions of such ordinance, all sections of the ordinance except that sought to be amended and those dependent thereon shall be in effect as though no referendum of any portion of the ordi- nance had been contemplated; or if any such amendment or repeal of the ordinance is not approved by a majority of those voting therein, then the ordinance passed by the Council shall at once take effect. 
(3)  Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition and passed by the Council without change or passed in an amended form and not required to be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters by the committee of the petitioners shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. If the provisions of two (2) or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict, the ordinance receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail. 
Sec. 6-404. - Expenditure measures; action before election. 
In case a petition be filed requiring that a measure passed by the Council providing for an expenditure of money, a bond issue, or a public improvement be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters, all steps preliminary to such actual expenditures, actual issue of bonds, or actual execution of contract for such improvement may be taken prior to the election. 
Chapter 5. - Removal of Mayor or Councilor 

Sec. 6-500. - Grounds of removal. 
The Mayor or any Councilor shall be subject to removal from any office for any one (1) or more of the following causes: 
(a)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime punishable as a felony; 
(c)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(d)  Violation of the Code of Ethics and Prohibited Practices provided in Appendix Two hereof which is hereby made a part of this Charter; 
(e)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; 
(f)  Failure for any other cause to, perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law; or 
(g)  Any cause as described or defined in O.C.G.A. § 21-4-3. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 6-501. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an elected officer provided for in this Chapter from office may be accomplished pursuant to provisions in O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 through O.C.G.A. § 21- 4-21. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
ARTICLE VII - REVENUE AND FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
Chapter 1. - Revenue and Appropriations 

Sec. 7-100. - Levy and collection of taxes; appropriations. 
(1)  The Council shall have full power and authority to levy and collect taxes, license fees or other charges and to appropriate funds for any and all purposes and upon any and all subjects of taxation, license fees and other charges for which the City of Columbus or Muscogee County has previously been authorized to levy and collect taxes, license fees and other charges and to so appropriate funds for any and all purposes under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, under any present general or special law of the State of Georgia specifically applicable to the City of Columbus or Muscogee County, or under any general law or any special law specifically applicable to the consolidated government which may be hereafter enacted, as well as the power to levy and collect taxes, license fees and other charges and appropriate funds for any of the powers, duties, obligations, liabilities and functions specified in this Charter. 
(2)  In addition thereto, the Council shall have full power and authority to assess, charge, and collect rentals, interests, fees, penalties, fines, and costs; to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer and water services under such rules and regulations as prescribed by ordinance; to levy and collect the garbage, trash, refuse and rubbish collection service charges and sanitary taxes under such rules and regulations as prescribed by ordinance; to collect income on investments and to accept funds, services or property from other political subdivisions and public agencies, either local, state or national, and from private persons, firms or corporations. 
Sec. 7-101. - Tax and service districts; taxation therein. 
(1)  The general services district as defined and authorized in Article 1, Section 1-103(2) of this Charter shall constitute a general services tax district wherein the Council shall levy, and collect taxes and shall appropriate money to perform and discharge those powers, functions and services provided therein by the consolidated government. 
(2)  The urban services district as authorized in Article I, Section 1-103(2) of this Charter together with any enlargement or modification thereof pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, and any additional urban services districts as established or modified by ordinance of the Council shall constitute urban services tax districts wherein the Council may levy and collect additional taxes and may appropriate additional money therefrom to perform and discharge those additional powers, functions and additional services provided therein by the consolidated government. 
(3)  The assessment of real and personal property for ad valorem tax purposes shall be upon a uniform basis throughout the entire area of the consolidated government; provided, however, the rate and manner of additional taxation in urban services districts may vary in any urban services tax district from that in another or other urban services tax districts in such a way as to reasonably reflect the kind, character, type, degree and level of services afforded to such urban services taxing district or districts. 
Sec. 7-102. - Millage limitation. 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "ordinary current expenses" means all current expenses, excepting only expenditures for education, for paving or macadamizing streets, and for payment of the principal and interest of the public debt, which shall be known as extraordinary expenses. 
(2)  For the purpose of paying the ordinary current expenses of the consolidated government, the Council is hereby empowered and authorized to levy and collect an ad valorem tax upon all property within said government subject to taxation, not to exceed eighteen (18) mills upon the assessed value of said property for the year 1971, and eighteen (18) mills upon the assessed value of said property for each year thereafter; provided, however, that this limitation shall not be deemed to apply to an additional ad valorem tax for hospital purposes as authorized by an Act of the General Assembly, approved February 17, 1949, (Ga. L. 1949, p. 801), as now or hereafter amended, nor to any tax to which such limitation is not applicable under the law. In the event that a local option sales and use tax is enacted by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, said eighteen (18) mills limitation shall be reduced to nine (9) mills for the year following the initial year in which the sales and use tax is enacted and for each year thereafter. 
Sec. 7-103. - Homestead exemptions. 
(1)  The homestead exemptions provided under the Constitution and laws of Georgia presently in force or as hereafter amended shall be applicable to all such property subject to ad valorem taxes within the territory of the consolidated government as defined in Article I, Section 1-102 of this Charter; Provided however, that such homestead exemptions (except for persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older) shall not apply to taxes levied for the retirement of bonds or for the support of the Muscogee County School District. 
(2)  The exemptions authorized by this section include the individual citizen homestead exemption, the disabled veteran homestead exemption, the homestead exemption applying to persons 65 years of age or older and any other homestead and personal property exemption as now or hereafter authorized by the Georgia Constitution. 
Chapter 2. - Borrowing and Indebtedness 

Sec. 7-200. - Issuance of general obligation bonds. 
(1)  The Council shall be authorized to issue and sell general obligation bonds under the provisions of the general laws of the state for any public purpose for the benefit of the consolidated government or any tax district or services district thereof; provided, however, that for the purpose of issuing and selling such general obligation bonds, the consolidated government shall be deemed a county and the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia governing the limitations, terms and procedures for the issuance and sale of bonds by counties shall apply to the consolidated government unless otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(2)  All general obligation bonds shall be issued in the name of Columbus, Georgia, and shall be an obligation thereof, and the full faith and credit of the consolidated government shall be pledged for all general obligation bonds issued thereunder which are payable from ad valorem taxes. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the Council have shall the authority to levy and collect ad valorem taxes without limit as to rate or amount on all taxable property within the territorial limits of the consolidated government. 
Sec. 7-201. - Debt limitation; general obligation bonds. 
The total general obligation bond indebtedness of the consolidated government payable from ad valorem taxes (including all outstanding general obligation bonds of the former City of Columbus and Muscogee County on October 5, 1971, shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the assessed value of all taxable property within the territorial limits of the consolidated government. 
Sec. 7-202. - Revenue bonds. 
The Council is hereby empowered and authorized to issue revenue bonds for the purposes and in the manner now or hereafter provided by Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 7-203. - Use of bond proceeds. 
All revenue derived by the consolidated government from the issuance and sale of bonds shall be used exclusively for the purposes for which such bonds were issued, and all ad valorem taxes collected for the purpose of bonds shall be used servicing or retiring such bonds shall be used exclusively for the payment of principal and interest thereof. 
Sec. 7-204. - Allocation of indebtedness. 
(1)  The Council shall establish a debt service fund for the general services district and a debt service fund for each urban services district created by the Council pursuant to Section 1-103 of this Charter for the amortization of general obligation bonds issued for the benefit thereof, including bonds issued prior to October 5, 1971, by the County of Muscogee and the City of Columbus which have been allocated to such districts under the provisions of this section. Such debt service funds shall consist of the cash and securities in the debt service funds for bonds issued by the County of Muscogee and the City of Columbus prior to October 5, 1971, and such funds hereinafter required to be paid into such funds and the interest earned on the investment thereof. The debt service funds for the bonds heretofore issued by the County of Muscogee and the City of Columbus shall be transferred to the debt service fund of the district to which such bonds are allocated by this section. Nothing contained herein, however, shall affect any debt service funds for any revenue bonds or other bonds which are required by the proceedings which authorized such bonds to be maintained as separate and segregated debt service funds for such bonds, and such sinking funds shall be transferred to the consolidated government and segregated and maintained in the manner provided in the proceedings which authorized the issuance of such bonds. 
(2)  All such debt service funds shall be invested in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Constitution and laws of Georgia governing investment of sinking funds of municipalities and counties. 
(3)  The annual tax levy ordinances for the general services district and the urban services districts shall provide, in addition to all other taxes assessed therein, a tax levy sufficient to pay the principal and interest charges on all outstanding general obligation bonds due or to be paid in the ensuing fiscal year. 
(4)  All moneys paid into any debt service fund shall be used exclusively for the purchase, retirement or payment of the outstanding bonds for which such debt service funds are created and maintained, and the treasurer shall keep a record of all receipts and disbursements of the debt service funds. 
Sec. 7-205. - Other indebtedness. 
The Council is hereby empowered and authorized to incur other and additional indebtedness in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Georgia relating to temporary loans to meet casual deficiencies of revenue, additional debt, and temporary loans payable within the year, and related matters. 
Sec. 7-206. - Street improvements. 
Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as affecting the power of the Council to issue bonds for street improvements and otherwise exercise the rights, powers and procedures set forth in an Act approved August 9, 1929 (Ga. L. 1929, p. 979). 
Chapter 3. - Property Tax Administration 

Sec. 7-300. - Assessing and collecting property taxes. 
(1)  The assessment and collection of property taxes by the consolidated government shall be as provided by state law. 
(2)  The Council shall provide by ordinance when taxes levied and imposed by the consolidated government shall become due and payable and when the same shall become delinquent. The Council by ordinance may authorize the payment of taxes due the government in installments, at the option of the taxpayer, and when and how and upon what terms such installments shall be due and payable. The Council may also authorize the payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(3)  The Council shall provide by ordinance for the manner and method of collecting delinquent taxes due the consolidated government. 
Chapter 4. - Budgeting 

Sec. 7-400. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the consolidated government shall begin on the first day of July of each year and shall end on the thirtieth day of June next following. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the consolidated government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 7-401. - Budget preparation and adoption. 
(1)  The Council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation, adoption and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program and a capital budget. Such ordinance shall require the use of program budgeting by the consolidated government. 
(2)  A proposed annual operating and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be prepared by the city manager to be submitted by the mayor to the Council on or before a date fixed by ordinance, but not less than 60 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. Such budgets shall be accompanied by a budget message from the mayor containing explanations of general fiscal policies, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budgets, and other information deemed appropriate. Copies of the annual operating and capital budgets shall be filed in the office of the clerk of Council and shall be open to public inspection. A summary of the proposed annual operating and capital budgets shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation including the newspaper having the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia. 
(3)  The annual operating and capital budgets shall consist of two (2) parts. Part I of the annual operating and capital budgets shall set forth in detail the revenue, expenditure and program information for those services, functions and capital improvement projects appertaining to the general services district. Part II of the annual operating and capital budgets shall set forth in detail the revenue, expenditure and program information for those services, functions and capital improvement appertaining only to urban services districts. Said Part II of the annual operating and capital budgets shall contain a separate section for each urban services district established pursuant to this Charter and by ordinance of the Council in order to reflect in detail the revenue, expenditure and program information for those additional services, functions and capital improvement projects rendered and furnished by the consolidated government in each of its urban services districts. 
(4)  Each of the above-described sections of the annual operating budget shall contain with respect to each of the operating funds of the consolidated government to which they are applicable: 
(a)  An estimate of the unencumbered fund balance or deficit at the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year and the amount of reserves for designated purposes or activities includable in the operating budget; 
(b)  A reasonable estimate of cash revenues to be received during the ensuing fiscal year, classified according to source, including a reasonable reserve for contingencies; 
(c)  Proposed expenditures detailed by each department, board, commission, office, agency, and activity in accordance with an established classification of accounts, including those capital outlays which are to be financed from the revenues of the ensuing year, and including all debt service requirements in full for such fiscal year payable from such funds; 
(d)  Work programs and performance data in justification of proposed expenditures for each department, board, commission, office, or agency; and 
(e)  Such other information as may be considered necessary or desired by the Council. 
(5)  In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed the total anticipated revenues plus the estimated unappropriated surplus of fund balance and applicable reserves and less any estimated deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. 
(6)  The capital program shall embrace all physical public improvements and any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto, the acquisition of property of a permanent nature, and the purchase of equipment for any public improvement when first erected or acquired that are to be financed, in whole or in part, from funds subject to control or appropriation by the Council. It shall show the capital expenditures which are planned for each of the six (6) ensuing fiscal years. For each separate purpose, project, facility, or other property there shall be shown the amount, if any, and the source of the money that has been spent, encumbered, or is intended to be spent or encumbered, prior to the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year and also the amounts and the sources of the money that are intended to be spent during each of the ensuing six (6) years. 
(HB 415, § 7, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 7-402. - Consideration and adoption of budgets by Council. 
(1)  The Council shall, upon receipt of the proposed budgets, schedule and hold one or more public hearings thereon, notice of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation including the newspaper having the largest circulation in Columbus, Georgia, at least seven days prior to the date set for such public hearing or hearings. The hearings may be adjourned from time to time. 
(2)  The Council may amend the proposed operating budget, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(3)  The Council shall adopt the final annual operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirtieth day of June of each year and such budget shall be effective for the fiscal year beginning on July 1. In the event, the Council fail to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the Council shall adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the annual operating budget shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations according to fund by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set forth in the budget document. 
(4)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose, or activity shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(5)  The Council may delete project from the capital program as submitted to it, but it shall not otherwise amend the capital program until it has requested through the Mayor the recommendations of the department of community development. The Council shall not be bound by such recommendations and may act without them if they are not received within thirty (30) days from the date they were requested. The Council shall adopt by ordinance the capital improvement program and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirtieth day of June of each year. The capital budget ordinance shall show in detail the capital expenditures intended to be made or incurred in the ensuing fiscal year that are to be financed from funds subject to control or appropriation by the Council and shall be in full conformity with that part of the capital program applicable to the year which it covers. Amounts specified as intended to be spent out of new appropriations shall, upon enactment of the capital budget ordinance, constitute appropriations of such amounts. The Council may amend the capital budget ordinance but no amendment shall be valid which does not conform to the capital improvement program. 
(HB 415, § 8, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 7-403. - Levy of property tax. 
As the next order of business following the adoption of the operating and capital budgets: 
(1)  The Council shall levy by ordinance a general services district tax on all real and personal property within the general services tax district as provided by this Charter. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy allowing an amount not less than the previous year's delinquent taxes and other uncollectibles, shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount of the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general services district for services to be rendered throughout the entire area of the consolidated government and for such other purposes, functions and services as may be authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, by this Charter, or by ordinance. 
(2)  The Council shall levy by ordinance a separate urban services district tax on all real and personal property within each urban services tax district established by this Charter or created by the Council. The tax rates set by such ordinance for each district shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy, allowing an amount not less than the previous year's delinquent taxes and other uncollectibles, shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount of the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the higher level of additional functions and services to be rendered in each such urban services district. 
Sec. 7-404. - Additional appropriations. 
The Council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget or capital budget, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose. 
Sec. 7-405. - Post audit. 
(1)  The Council shall provide annually for an independent audit of the accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the consolidated government and of its every office, department, board, authority, commission or agency. The audit shall be made by an accountant or an accounting firm, the members of which have no pecuniary, personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the consolidated government or of its departments, offices, boards, commissions or agencies. The designated accountant shall be a certified public accountant or, if an accounting firm is employed, the members thereof shall be so certified and thoroughly qualified by training and experience in governmental accounting to perform the audit. 
(2)  The audit may be conducted on a quarterly or continuing basis and the final report of the annual audit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year and in no event later than four (4) months after the close of the fiscal year. The audit report shall be available to the public. 
(3)  The Council may at any time order an examination or special audit of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the consolidated government. 
Chapter 5. - Procurement and Disposition of Property 

Sec. 7-500. - Contracting procedures. 
The Council shall prescribe by ordinance rules and regulations to be followed in the making of contracts in order to bind the consolidated government. All contracts and all ordinances or resolutions which make or authorize contracts shall be approved by the City Attorney. Except where otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all contracts of the consolidated government shall be signed by the Mayor or by some person designated by him or her with the approval of the Council and shall be authenticated by the Clerk of Council. 
Sec. 7-501. - Sale and disposition of property. 
(1)  The Council shall be authorized to sell any real or personal property owned or held by the consolidated government for governmental or other public purposes under such rules and regulations as the Council may establish; provided, however, that any public utility owned by the consolidated government may only be sold when such sale has been approved by a majority vote of the electors of Columbus, Georgia, voting in a regular or in a special election called for such purpose. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, any sale of real property shall be made only after the receipt of sealed bids and due advertisement of such sale in one or more newspapers of general circulation including that with the largest general circulation in Columbus, Georgia, once a week for a period of two weeks preceding the date at which such sale is to be made. All sales of real property shall be subject to confirmation by the Council. 
(2)  The Council is empowered to authorize the following transactions: 
(a)  A transfer of any real or personal property owned by the consolidated government to another governmental entity upon a finding that such transfer is in the public interest; 
(b)  A sale of any such property to another governmental entity; and 
(c)  An exchange of such property for property that is owned either privately or by some other governmental entity. 
In each such instance, when the property is sold or exchanged or transferred, a statement shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation, including that with the largest general circulation in Columbus, Georgia, on each Monday of the two weeks which precede the week in which such transaction is to be concluded. Such statement shall contain a description of the property or properties involved and the prices and estimated values as to each item of property. 
(3)  The consolidated government may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes, upon a report by the Mayor and the adoption of a resolution by the Council finding that the property is not needed for public purposes and that the interest of the consolidated government therein has no appreciable monetary value. 
(4)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of Columbus, Georgia, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off and is not needed by the consolidated government, Council may authorize the execution and delivery in the name of the consolidated government of a deed conveying said cut-off or separate parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way in said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owners or for other consideration. 
(HB 415, § 9, 4-24-13) 
ARTICLE VIII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 1. - County Officers and Agencies 

Sec. 8-100. - Sheriff. 
The sheriff of Muscogee County in office on October 5, 1971, and his or her successors in office shall be the sheriff of the consolidated government. The sheriff shall serve for the same term and his or her compensation shall be fixed as heretofore provided by law. Subsequent elections for sheriff shall be upon the same basis as provided by law for sheriffs generally. The sheriff shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as are conferred upon sheriffs generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed so as to affect the eligibility of the sheriff or sheriff's deputies for membership in the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund. In addition to the powers and duties conferred upon the sheriff by law, the sheriff of the consolidated government shall be authorized to maintain a crime prevention unit independent of any such unit or activity maintained or provided by the department of public safety. 
Sec. 8-101. - Judge of Probate Court. 
The Judge of Probate Court of Muscogee County in office on October 5, 1971, and his or her successors in office shall be the Judge of Probate Court of the consolidated government. He or she shall serve for the same term and his or her compensation shall be fixed as heretofore provided by law. Subsequent elections for Judge of Probate Court shall be upon the same basis as provided by law for Judges of Probate Court generally. The Judge of Probate Court shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred upon Judges of Probate Court generally by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 8-102. - Tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner of Muscogee County in office on October 5, 1971, and his or her successors in office shall be the tax commissioner of the consolidated government. The tax commissioner's election, term of office and compensation shall be as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved July 25, 1927 (Ga. L. 1927, p. 638), as amended. The tax commissioner shall collect all ad valorem taxes and all intangible taxes and shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as are conferred upon county tax receivers and county tax collectors by the laws of Georgia not in conflict with this Charter and such other or additional duties and powers as may be prescribed by ordinance of the Council. 
Sec. 8-103. - Coroner. 
The office of coroner of Muscogee County shall continue as an office of the consolidated government until such time as it may be discontinued or abolished by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this section, and all laws applicable thereto shall continue in full force and effect until such date. On October 5, 1971, the incumbent coroner of Muscogee County shall be the coroner of the consolidated government and his or her election, term of office and compensation shall be as provided by law. At any time following the adoption of this Charter, but not less than twelve (12) months prior to the expiration of the term of office of the then incumbent coroner, the Council shall be authorized by ordinance to provide for the creation and establishment of a medical examiner system in the consolidated government to become effective and operative upon the expiration of such term of office at which time the office of coroner shall stand abolished and all emoluments appertaining thereto shall cease. Such system shall have the power to perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as are conferred upon coroners generally by the laws of Georgia. Said ordinance shall specify such other powers, duties and functions as may be required for establishing a medical examiner system within the consolidated government, including the manner of appointment of a chief medical examiner as head of the medical examiner system and provision for offices, facilities, laboratories, personnel and finances. 
Sec. 8-104. - County agencies. 
The grand juries in and for Muscogee County, the Superior Court for Muscogee County, the State Court of Muscugee County, the Probate Court, the Municipal Court of Columbus, the Juvenile Court of Muscogee County, the Muscogee County department of public health, and the Muscogee County department of family and children services shall continue to function, unaffected except as redesignated by this Charter. The personnel of those bodies shall be selected as heretofore selected, and those officials heretofore elected by the people shall hereafter be so elected. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as altering the status of the Muscogee County School District; provided, however, that the Muscogee County school board shall consist of nine members who shall be residents of the consolidated government. Such courts, boards, personnel, officers, and officials shall continue to occupy the same status with respect to the consolidated government in the same position as previously occupied with respect to Muscogee County. Similarly, the Council shall succeed to such rights, duties, and obligations with regard to such courts, boards, officers, offices, and agencies and the employed personnel thereof as heretofore possessed by either the board of commissioners of Muscogee County or the mayor and city commission of the City of Columbus, or both, specifically including, but not limited to, any right and authority to name and designate personnel. 
(HB 415, § 10, 4-24-13) 
Sec. 8-105. - Budgets of County Officers and agencies. 
All elective officers such as the sheriff, tax commissioner, Judge of Probate Court, coroner and other elective officers, and all agencies not under the direct control and jurisdiction of the Council such as the board of health and board of family and children services, which receive appropriations from the Council, shall prior to the commencement of each fiscal year prepare and submit to the City Manager annual operating and capital budget requests for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budget requests shall be incorporated into the overall consolidated government budget for submission by the Mayor to the Council. The Council shall grant a hearing to any such officer or agency on such proposed budgets. 
Chapter 2. - Laws Applicable to Consolidated Government 

Sec. 8-200. - Application of laws; laws in force. 
(1)  The general laws of the State of Georgia of a criminal nature shall be applicable to and within the limits of the consolidated government. Except as provided in Chapter 4 of this Article with regard to Charter amendments, the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia relating to the jurisdiction, powers, authority, duties, and responsibilities of or otherwise referring to, municipal corporations or counties, or both, which are not in conflict herewith shall be applicable to the consolidated government. General laws of local application through classification by population, not in conflict with this Charter: 
(a)  Which on October 5, 1971, apply to the City of Columbus and Muscogee County shall be applicable to the consolidated government; 
(b)  Which apply to the consolidated government, as either a City or a County at the time of their enactment or thereafter shall be effective; but 
(c)  Which did not apply to the City of Columbus or Muscogee County or the consolidated government at the time of their enactment shall not become applicable to the consolidated government except through the adoption of a resolution to that effect by the Council. 
(2)  In construing the applicability of provisions of the Constitution of Georgia and the general laws of the State of Georgia which apply in general terms to either counties or municipalities or both, the following terms as used in such laws shall be construed to include the consolidated government as follows: 
(a)  "County" shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  "City," "town," "municipal corporation" or "municipality" shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  "Commissioners of roads and revenues" and "board of county commissioners" shall be construed to include the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(d)  "Council," "Mayor and council," "aldermen" and "board of aldermen" shall be construed to include the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(e)  "Chairman of the commissioners of roads and revenues," "chairman of the board of county commissioners," and "Mayor" shall be construed to include the Mayor of Columbus, Georgia. 
(f)  Any other terms and provisions as used in such laws to refer specifically to counties, municipalities, or both and the officers, employees, departments and agencies thereof shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia, and its officers, employees, departments and agencies. 
(3)  Local Acts of the State of Georgia which apply specifically to either Muscogee County, the City of Columbus, or both, shall be applicable to the consolidated government. In construing the applicability of local Acts of the State of Georgia which apply specifically to either Muscogee County, the City of Columbus, or both, the following terms as used in such Acts shall be construed to mean the consolidated government as follows: 
(a)  "Muscogee County," "Town of Columbus" and "City of Columbus" shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  "Commissioners of roads and revenues," "board of county commissioners" and "City Commission" shall be construed to mean Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  "Chairman of the commissioners of roads and revenues," "chairman of the board of county commissioners" and "Mayor" shall be construed to mean Mayor of Columbus, Georgia. 
(d)  Any other terms and provisions as used in such Acts to refer specifically to Muscogee County, the City, of Columbus, or both and the officers, employees, departments and agencies thereof shall be construed to mean Columbus, Georgia, and its officers, employees, departments and agencies. 
(4)  In construing the applicability of laws in force to the consolidated government, the following order shall prevail: 
(a)  The Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended by a constitutional amendment ratified at the general election held on November 5, 1968. 
(b)  An Act of the General Assembly approved April 23, 1969 (Ga. L. 1969, p. 3356). 
(c)  The general laws of uniform application now in force or hereafter enacted by the General Assembly (as distinguished from general laws of local application through classification by population) applicable to municipal corporations, or counties, or both, not in conflict with this Charter. 
(d)  Special laws applicable to the former City of Columbus or Muscogee County, or both, not in conflict herewith. 
(e)  The general laws of local application through classification by population as and to the extent provided in Section 8-200(1) hereof. 
(f)  This Charter and all ordinances passed pursuant thereto. 
(g)  Existing ordinances of the former City of Columbus and existing resolutions of the former County of Muscogee not in conflict with this Charter. 
Sec. 8-201. - Limitation of claims and service. 
(1)  All claims contractual against the consolidated government must be presented within twelve (12) months after they accrue or become payable or the same are claimed, unless held by minors or other persons laboring under disabilities who are allowed twelve (12) months after the removal of such disability. 
(2)  Service on the consolidated government of any suit, process or order of court shall be served upon the Mayor. 
Sec. 8-202. - Tort liability. 
The tort liability, expressly including liability based on a theory of nuisance, of the consolidated government shall be the tort liability applicable to counties. Such tort liability shall be uniform throughout the territorial limits of the consolidated government. 
Sec. 8-203. - Conflict of laws. 
For purposes of all applicable laws, the consolidated government shall constitute a municipality and a county or both. To the extent permitted by state law, if a law applicable to municipalities and the same or another law applicable to counties are in conflict, the Columbus Council shall have the power to choose the law that most benefits the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 8-204. - Executions. 
Whenever any tax or special assessment is authorized or empowered to be levied or imposed by this Charter which is required to be collected by the department of finance and such is not paid within the time period specified by the Council and no specific provision is elsewhere provided in this Charter for its collection, then the director of the department of finance shall issue execution in the name of the consolidated government against such person, firm or entity liable there for or property subject thereto for such sums as may be due with interest at the legal rate from due date, and penalties and costs, and the consolidated government shall have the right to enforce payment of such execution by levy and sale as in the case of county taxes, and the purchaser at such sale shall acquire the same title and rights as a purchaser at a sale for county taxes. Executions issued by the tax commissioner and levy and sale thereunder shall be governed by general law. 
Sec. 8-205. - Authority to deal with federal and state agencies. 
Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the consolidated government shall have the power and authority to participate in, cooperate in and take all necessary action with respect to any and all projects, programs and undertakings of any nature whatsoever authorized by any statute, rule or regulation of the United States or the State of Georgia, or any federal or state agency or instrumentality, including but not limited to, urban renewal, highways, aviation, aviation terminals, airports, airport facilities, municipal area or regional development, sewers and sewage disposal, public housing, housing for the aged, transportation or mass transit or any phase thereof and ecology and environment or any aspect thereof; to borrow money and issue promissory notes, general obligation bonds or revenue bonds, or a combination thereof, for any such purpose; and to execute mortgages or deeds of trust in favor of any federal agency, secured by property of which the consolidated government is the legal or beneficial or equitable owner, or in favor of any private agency where the loan is guaranteed by a federal agency. 
Sec. 8-206. - Federal and state aid. 
(1)  The consolidated government shall be deemed a county and shall also be deemed an incorporated city or municipality for the purpose of determining its right to receive and for the purpose of receiving state aid or grants-in-aid from the State of Georgia or from the United States or from any other agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private. The consolidated government shall be entitled to receive and shall receive as state aid or as grants-in-aid from the State of Georgia under any state law or from the United States under any federal law or from any other agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private, all funds to which a county is, or may hereafter be, entitled and also all funds to which an incorporated city or municipality is, or may hereafter be, entitled and to receive the same without diminution or loss by reason of consolidation of the County of Muscogee and City of Columbus. 
(2)  The consolidated government shall be authorized to receive and shall receive all funds which Muscogee County is or may hereafter be entitled to receive from state funds made available by appropriations of the General Assembly to be distributed to the several counties to be used exclusively for the construction and maintenance of the public roads as provided by Code Section 48-14-3 of the O.C.G.A., as amended and as specifically set forth in an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 8, 1945, (Ga. L. 1945, p. 316), and the provisions of such law shall apply in full force and effect to the consolidated government. The consolidated government shall be authorized to receive and shall receive all state funds which Muscogee County is or may hereafter be entitled to receive as grants to counties appropriated as a part of the highway department appropriation designated as follows: "for grants to counties for aid in county road construction and maintenance," as initially authorized by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 21, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 428), and hereafter all such Acts providing for grants to counties which are appropriated as a part of the highway department appropriation designation: "for grants to counties for aid in county road construction and maintenance", shall apply in full force and effect to the consolidated government. The consolidated government shall be authorized to receive and shall receive all funds which Muscogee County is or may hereafter be entitled to receive from state funds made available by law and distributed to the governing authorities of counties of this state to be expended for any public purposes as authorized by Article 1 of Chapter 17 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, or by any future laws for the purposes set out in Code Section 36-17-1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, and the provisions of said article or any future such general laws shall apply in full force and effect to the consolidated government. 
(3)  The consolidated government shall be authorized to receive and shall receive all funds which the City of Columbus is or may hereafter be entitled to receive as grants to certain incorporated municipalities under the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 40 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, and the provisions of said article, as amended, shall apply in full force and effect to the consolidated government. When state aid or other grants-in-aid is distributed to any incorporated municipality on the basis of population which the City of Columbus would hereafter be entitled to receive under any state or federal law following the United States decennial census of 1970 or any future such census, then the total population of the urban services district or districts shall be used in calculating and determining the basis of the distribution of such funds to the consolidated government. 
(4)  The consolidated government shall be authorized to receive and shall receive all funds which the City of Columbus is or may hereafter be entitled to receive as grants to certain incorporated municipalities to be used for any public purposes under the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 40 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, and the provisions of said article shall apply in full force and effect in the consolidated government. When state aid or other grants-in-aid is distributed to any incorporated municipality on the basis of population which the City of Columbus would hereafter be entitled to receive under any state or federal law following the United States decennial census of 1970 or any future such census, then the total population of the urban services district or districts shall be used in calculating and determining the basis of the distribution of such funds to the consolidated government. 
Chapter 3. - Pensions and Personnel 

Sec. 8-300. - Existing pension rights protected. 
(1)  Persons who, on October 5, 1971, are employed by any office, department, board, commission or agency of the former City of Columbus shall retain all rights which have accrued to them under the "Employees Retirement Fund," established pursuant to an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 21, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 2790), as amended. Pending the establishment of a new pension system as hereinafter provided in Section 8-301, the consolidated government shall continue in force and effect the said employees' retirement fund for city employees covered thereby who are employed by the consolidated government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. 
(2)  Persons who, on October 5, 1971, are employed by any office, department, board, commission or agency of the former County of Muscogee shall retain all rights which have accrued to them under the "Muscogee County, Georgia Pension System" established pursuant to an Act of the General Assembly, approved March 9, 1945 (Ga. L. 1945, p. 1100), as amended. Pending the establishment of a new pension system as hereinafter provided in Section 8-301, the consolidated government shall continue in force and effect the said Muscogee County, Georgia, pension system for county employees covered thereby who are employed by the consolidated government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 8-301. - Establishment of new pension systems; merging of existing systems. 
The Council is hereby, authorized and empowered to establish and maintain a new pension system or pension systems affecting new employees and such other employees as desired to be covered thereby and to revise, combine and consolidate any pension system in effect on October 5, 1971, and further, is specifically authorized, whenever Social Security provisions are legally available to employees or any group of employees of the consolidated government, to provide for the integration of such Social Security provisions with any existent or new pension system; provided, however, that in no event shall any revision, combination or consolidation of any existing pension system in effect when this Charter is adopted result in the curtailment or diminishment of any right accrued under any existing pension system to any person heretofore employed by the City of Columbus, Muscogee County, or of any agency of such former governments. 
Sec. 8-302. - Merit service. 
(1)  All positions in the service of the consolidated government shall be in the merit service except the following: 
(a)  Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; 
(b)  The members of boards, commissions and authorities; 
(c)  The City Officers, Recorders and Recorders Pro Tem, Clerk of Council, and heads and directors of departments; 
(d)  Persons temporarily employed in a professional or scientific capacity or to conduct a special inquiry, investigation, examination or installation; 
(e)  Temporary or part-time employees; and 
(f)  Such other positions as may be excepted by ordinance of the Council. 
(2)  All officers and employees in the merit service shall be governed by and subject to the Code of Ethics and Prohibited Practices set forth in Appendix Two hereof, which appendix is hereby made a part of this Charter. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
Sec. 8-303. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
The department of administration or other agency designated by ordinance of the Council shall prepare and recommend to the City Manager such personnel rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Charter with respect to persons in the merit service. When approved by the City Manager, such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Mayor who shall propose them to the Council for adoption with such changes as, he or she deems desirable. The Council may by ordinance adopt them with or without amendment and may amend the same from time to time. The rules and amendments thereof so adopted shall, to the extent that they are consistent with the terms of this Charter, have the force of law. Among other things, they shall provide for the method of holding competitive examinations; establishment, maintenance, consolidation and cancellation of eligibility lists for the merit service; method of certifying lists for the merit service; method of certifying eligibles for appointment in the merit service; administration of the classification plan and pay plan; methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto; probationary periods of employment; transfers of employees within the classification plan; hours of work, attendance regulations, vacations, sick leave, and other leaves of absence; overtime pay; the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; procedure on appeals to the personnel review board from orders of suspension or removal or other disciplinary action; conduct of in-service training programs; and such other matters as may be necessary to provide adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the consolidated government. 
Sec. 8-304. - Classification and pay plan. 
(1)  The department of administration or other agency designated by ordinance of the Council shall prepare and recommend to the City Manager a plan of classification and grading for all positions in the classified service according to similarity of authority, duties, and responsibilities. When approved by the City Manager such classification plan shall be submitted to the Mayor, who shall propose it to the Council for adoption with such changes as he or she deems desirable. The Council may adopt the plan by ordinance with or without amendment. Such plan shall take effect when adopted by the Council or on the thirtieth day after it is submitted to the Council if prior thereto the Council has not disapproved it by resolution. Changes in the classification plan may be recommended from time to time in the same manner as herein provided for original adoption of the plan. 
(2)  The department of administration or other agency designated by ordinance of the Council shall prepare and submit to the City Manager a pay plan consisting of a salary range for each class of positions in the classification plan following its adoption. Such pay plan shall provide for regular increments of salary increases within such range to be earned by length of service and satisfactory service ratings. Each such range shall be determined with due regard to the salary ranges for other classes and to the relative difficulty and responsibility of characteristic duties of positions in the class, the minimum qualification required, the prevailing rate paid for similar employment outside the service of the consolidated government, and any other factors that may properly be considered to have a bearing upon the fairness or adequacy of the range. The City Manager shall submit the pay plan to the Mayor who shall propose it to the Council for adoption with such changes as he or she deems desirable and such pay plan shall take effect when adopted by the Council or on the thirtieth day after it is submitted if prior thereto the Council has not disapproved it by resolution. The pay plan adopted by the Council shall include a minimum and maximum and such intermediate rates as may be deemed desirable for each class of positions. Amendments to the pay schedule may be recommended from time to time in the same manner as herein provided for original adoption of the plan. 
Sec. 8-305. - Residence of employees. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance from time to time whether the regular, permanent officers and employees of the consolidated government in the merit service must reside within Columbus, Georgia, during their continuance in such office or employment. 
Chapter 4. - Amending Charter 

Sec. 8-400. - Proposal of amendment. 
Except as provided in subsection (2) hereof: 
(1)  This Charter may be modified, rescinded, changed or amended only by the following methods: 
(a)  An Act of the General Assembly of Georgia; 
(b)  An ordinance of the Council duly adopted by the affirmative vote of not fewer than six (6) of its members favoring such amendment and ratification thereof by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the consolidated government voting in a referendum election as provided in Section 8-401 hereof; 
(c)  A petition of ten (10) percent of the electors qualified to vote in the last preceding regular election for offices of the Mayor and Councilors filed with the Clerk of the Council and ratification thereof by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the consolidated government voting in a referendum election as provided in Section 8-401 hereof. Any petition filed with the Clerk of Council under this section shall be validated by the board of elections in the same manner as formerly provided in Section 6-301(3) of this Charter for petitions for recall. 
(2)  Any proposal for an amendment, modification or rescission of this Charter, the effect of which provides for an abolishment of the consolidated government, shall not become effective until approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the consolidated government voting in a referendum election as provided in Section 8-401 and such time as the General Assembly of Georgia has provided for and established a successor government to replace and supersede the consolidated government established by this Charter, and until such event the consolidated government herein created shall continue in full force and effect as if such amendment, modification or rescission had not been adopted. 
Sec. 8-401. - Election. 
When an amendment to this Charter has been properly proposed, either by ordinance or by petition, the board of elections shall call and conduct a referendum election on a date and in the manner provided for under Code Section 21-2-540 of the O.C.G.A. after the date of the adoption of the ordinance or the validation of the petition, as the case may be, at which the electorate of Columbus, Georgia, will vote to ratify or reject the amendment or amendments proposed; provided, however, if a regular election is to be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days after the adoption of the resolution or the validation of the petition then such referendum election shall be held at the same time as the regular election. The ballot shall be prepared so as to sufficiently set forth the subject matter of each proposed amendment, numbered as the same is numbered in the resolution of the Council or in the petition, and to provide the voters a choice to vote "For Ratification" and "Against Ratification" of each proposed amendment. Each proposed amendment shall be ratified when a majority of the votes cast at the special referendum election shall be in favor of ratification, and each proposed amendment shall be rejected when a majority of said votes shall be against ratification. Said election shall be held in accordance with applicable laws governing elections as provided in Chapter 2 of Article VI of this Charter, and the costs of said election shall be paid out of the general funds of Columbus, Georgia. The Judge of Probate Court shall canvass the returns and certify the results to the Secretary of State of Georgia, who shall issue a proclamation showing the results of said election on the ratification or rejection of each proposed amendment to this Charter. One (1) copy of the proclamation shall be attached to the copy of this Charter previously certified to said Secretary of State, and one (1) copy shall be delivered to the Clerk of the Council who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter in his or her custody. 
Sec. 8-402. - Limitation. 
Once a Charter amendment is proposed on a particular subject either by ordinance or by valid petition, as provided in section 8-400(1), no amendment on the same subject shall be proposed by ordinance or petition within twelve (12) months after the referendum election thereon. 
Chapter 5. - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 8-500. - Fidelity bonds. 
All officers and employees of the consolidated government both elective and appointive shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the law or the Council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 8-501. - Existing rights and interests. 
No provision of this Charter is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests, public or private: 
(a)  Vested or accrued as of the effective date of the provision, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law repealed by this Charter, except any right or interest in any public elective office, not conferred by this Charter. 
(b)  Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action taken (including the adoption of ordinances or resolutions) pursuant to or within the scope of any provision of law repealed by this Charter. 
Sec. 8-502. - Section captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
Sec. 8-503. - Effect of repeals. 
No law heretofore repealed, expressly or by implication, shall be revived by the repeal herein of the repealing Act, nor by any provision of this Charter that disclaims an intention to repeal or affect enumerated laws. 
Sec. 8-504. - Severability clause. 
In any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions or other applications of this Charter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this Charter and the applications thereof are hereby declared to be severable. 
Sec. 8-505. - Repeal of specific law. 
An Act providing a charter for the county-wide government of Columbus, Georgia, approved October 5, 1971 (Ga. L. 1971, Ex. Sess., p. 2007), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 8-506. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX TWO - CODE OF ETHICS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
1.  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer or employee of the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof shall knowingly: 
(a)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(b)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(c)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(d)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(e)  Represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof; 
(f)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
2.  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer or employee of the consolidated government who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any office, department or agency thereof shall disclose such private interest to the Council. The Mayor or any Councilor who has a private interest in any matter pending before Council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the Council and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer or employee of any office, department or agency to which this code of ethics applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such office, department or agency shall disclose such private interest [to] the Council. 
3.  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer or employee of the consolidated government or of any office, department or agency thereof to which this code of ethics applies shall use property owned by the consolidated government for personal benefit, convenience or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the Council. 
4.  Testimony of public officials relating to public affairs. Any office or employee of the consolidated government who is duly and properly called as a witness before any consolidated government, state or federal judicial or administrative tribunal and who shall before such tribunal fail to answer any proper question concerning the performance of his or her official duties shall be guilty of a violation of this code of ethics. 
5.  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any contract between the consolidated government or any agency or entity to which this code of ethics applies and another party shall be voidable or rescindable at the option of the consolidated government at any time if any elected official, appointed officer or employee of the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof has any interest in such contract and does not disclose such interest in accordance with Section 2 hereof. 
6.  Ineligibility of elected officials. No former Mayor or former Councilor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the consolidated government until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected. 
7.  Political activities of certain officers and employees. 
(a)  No appointive officer or employee of the consolidated government shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office in Muscogee County, nor shall any appointive officer or employee thereof electioneer for a candidate or take any part in the management of the affairs of any political party or in any political campaign in Muscogee County, except to exercise his or her right as citizen privately to express his or her opinions and cast his or her vote. 
(b)  No appointive officer or employee of the government shall be granted any leave of absence for the purpose of engaging in any of the activities set forth in paragraph (a) hereof. 
8.  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Officials, officers and employees of the consolidated government may be punished for violation of Sections 1 through 7 of this Appendix as follows: 
(a)  The Mayor and members of the Council shall be subject to removal from office as provided in Article VI of this Charter; 
(b)  All appointed officers and department heads not in the merit service shall be subject to removal from office as provided in Article III, Chapter 1, Section 3-104(4) of this Charter; 
(c)  Members of the merit service, upon violation of the code of ethics as provided for herein, shall be subject to dismissal in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations adopted by the Council. 
(2)  The Council may provide by ordinance that violations of Sections 1 through 7 of this Appendix shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00), by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both. Any punishment so provided by ordinance may be imposed without regard to whether punishment is imposed as provided in part (1) of this section. 
(Ref. of 11-6-12) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
(Disposition of provisions incorporated into Charter, Ex Act No. 2  of 1971, H.B. No. 13-Ex) 

 

 

 
Footnotes: 

Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Columbus, Georgia Code" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 78-65, § 3, 5-23-78) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  City: The words "the city", "this city" or "city" shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  County: The words "the county", "this county", or "county" shall be construed to include Columbus, Georgia. 
(c)  State: The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
(d)  City commission: Whenever the words "city commission" or "the commission" are used, they shall be construed to mean the Council of Columbus, Georgia; and wherever the words "councilman" or "councilmen" are used, the words "councilor" and "councilors" shall be substituted therefor. 
(e)  Mayor: Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall be construed to mean the mayor of Columbus, Georgia. 
(f)  City manager: Whenever the words "city manager" are used they shall be construed to mean the city manager of Columbus, Georgia. 
(g)  City clerk: The words "city clerk" shall be construed to mean the Clerk of Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(h)  City treasurer: The words "city treasurer" shall be construed to mean the treasurer of Columbus, Georgia. 
(i)  Recorder: The word "recorder" shall be construed to mean the recorder in the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(j)  Recorder's court: The words "recorder's court" and "mayor's court" shall refer to the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(k)  City attorney: The words "city attorney" shall be construed to mean the city attorney of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 78-65, § 3, 5-23-78) 
State Law reference— For state law as to definitions see Ga. Code, Title 102. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted, unless expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, now reading as follows: _______, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______." The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language shall be used: 
"That the Code of Ordinances of Columbus, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: _______." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission, which will cause the law of the City of Columbus to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Whenever the recorder of the city shall, under any of the ordinances of the city, adjudge a person to pay a fine, or a fine and costs of prosecution, he shall also provide in such sentence a period of time for which such person shall be imprisoned in default of the payment of the same. Whenever the sentence shall be one of both fine and imprisonment, it shall also provide for an additional period of imprisonment in the city jail for which such person shall be held in default of payment of fine and costs. Such additional period shall commence to run from the expiration of the period of imprisonment fixed by the sentence, provided that in no case shall the imprisonment for failure to pay a fine, or fine and costs, together with any other imprisonment in the same case, exceed the period of 60 days. 
Nothing in this section shall exempt a prisoner from being put at labor during the period of such additional imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 83-62, § 1, 7-26-83; Ord. No. 00-61, § 1, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 1-9. - Judgments and sentences to run concurrently. 
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the recorder's court of the city shall run concurrently unless otherwise specifically provided by the recorder of such court in such judgments and sentences. 
(Ord. No. 91-34, 5-21-91) 
Sec. 1-10. - Use of prisoners for work on private property; personal use of public property by city employees and officers; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use, or to allow the use, of prisoners for work on private property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for employees and officers of Columbus, Georgia to use any property, equipment, vehicles or other things of value belonging to Columbus, Georgia for personal use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any employee or officer of Columbus, Georgia to allow the use of any property, equipment, vehicles or other things of value belonging to Columbus, Georgia for personal use of any person whomsoever. 
(Ord. No. 71-306, §§ 1—4, 12-14-71; Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 5-23-78) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— While not specifically amendatory of this Code, it should be noted that Ga. Laws 1985, Act. No. 94, § 1, provided that the Charter be amended by substituting the words "councilor" or "councilors" for "councilman" and "councilmen" wherever the same were used therein. 
Note— City of Columbus vs. Howard, 6 Ga. 213, held that where city hires equipment for one purpose and uses the equipment for another purpose it is liable for injury or damage resulting to such equipment from the unauthorized use. Brumly Chair Co. vs. City of Columbus, 46 Ga. App. 163, 167 SE 221, held that manufacturer could not recover from the city where the dealer who delivered to the city gave the manufacturer a bad check for the chairs. See Epping vs. City of Columbus, 117 Ga. 263, 43 SE 803, method of determining the debt limitation to which the city may obligate itself under the State Constitution. Massey vs. City of Columbus, 9 Ga. App. 9, 70 SE 263, held that the imposition of fees for the use of the market on farmers bringing produce to the market was authorized by the charter of the city. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Governing bodies, generally. 
The governing body of the city shall be administered by the council of consolidated government, officers, boards and agencies, as established and provided in the charter, and the manner therein provided; and by the officers, boards and agencies provided by this Code. Appointees appointed hereunder who have served two consecutive full terms shall not be eligible to succeed themselves until the lapse of 12 months from the end of said terms. This limitation shall not apply to permanent full-time employees of the consolidated government who are serving in appointed positions, to the Muscogee County Board of Elections, to the Columbus, Georgia Employees' Pension Plan Board of Trustees, to the Columbus Airport Commission, to the Board of Honor, to the Columbus Housing Authority, to the Medical Center Hospital Authority, to the Columbus, Georgia Hospital Authority, to the Columbus Building Authority, to the Downtown Development Authority, to the Resource Recovery Development Authority, or to any other board or authority where state law permits service of more than two consecutive full terms. The rule of succession contained in this section shall be controlling notwithstanding any other rules of succession heretofore enacted for particular boards and agencies, and appointees serving initial staggered terms that are shorter in length than a full term shall nevertheless be eligible to succeed themselves for two successive full terms in addition to serving the shorter staggered term. Members of the Columbus Council shall not be appointed to serve upon boards, commissions, or authorities of the consolidated government unless such appointment is expressly required by state law. To the extent that persons with the necessary qualifications are available, boards, commissions and authorities of the consolidated government shall have among their members at least one resident from each of the two senatorial districts into which Muscogee County is divided for representation in the General Assembly; in determining what qualifications are necessary, the council shall look to existing ordinances or resolutions. 
Unless authorized by law or ordinance or resolution, the Columbus Council shall not appoint to any board, commission, or authority an employee of the consolidated government or an employee of any of its subordinate branches or an employee of any board, commission, or authority the members of which are appointed by the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 69-237, § 1, 11-24-69; Ord. No. 73-8, § 1, 1-17-73; Ord. No. 86-92, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 87-31, § 1, 3-17-87; Ord. No. 88-118, 11-29-88; Ord. No. 91-40, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 91-43, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-12-01; Ord. No. 02-109, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 11-23, § 1, 5-31-11) 
Charter reference— Legislative branch, § 3-100 et seq.; executive branch, § 4-100 et seq.; judicial branch, § 5-100 et seq.; general provisions, § 8-100 et seq. 
Cross reference— Uses of prisoners for work on private property, § 1-10; personal use of public property by city employees and officers, § 1-10; creation of plumber examining board, § 8-1; creation of electrical examining board, § 8-6; planning advisory commission, §§ 22-2, 22-3. 
State Law reference— Discretionary powers of city council or governing bodies, Ga. Code, § 69-203, which section is included in Part II of this Volume. 
Note— Wiley vs. City of Columbus, 109 Ga. 295, 34 SE 575 held that where in an action on the contract there was no allegation that the contract was made through the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, the declaration was had where the charter of the city required that contracts by the city be made through the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen. 
Sec. 2-1.01. - Appointment of Councilmembers as advisory members of authorities. 
The Columbus Council may appoint a member of the Columbus Council as an advisory member of any authority created by ordinance of the Columbus Council, but such advisory member shall not be entitled to vote at meetings of any such authority. 
(Ord. No. 97-108, 9-30-97) 
Editor's note— The provisions of Ord. No. 97-108, adopted Sept. 30, 1997, which amended Ch. 2 of the Code, have been included herein as § 2-1.01 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-1.1. - Ordinances effective in city limits prior to consolidation adopted. 
All ordinances of the City of Columbus which were effective in the city limits of the City of Columbus prior to the consolidation of December 31, 1970, and which were effective to the city limits lines prior to the consolidation of December 31, 1970, be, and the same are hereby ordained to be effective throughout Columbus, Georgia, after consolidation of December 31, 1970, and to the Columbus, Georgia, limit lines as they will exist after consolidation of December 31, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 71-1, § 1, 1-14-71; Ord. No. 71-2, § 1, 1-12-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. Nos. 71-1 and 71-2 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion as § 2-1.1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-2. - Council meetings—Time, day, location. 
The regular meetings of the Council of Columbus, Georgia shall be held at 9:00 a.m. on the second Tuesday of each month and at 5:30 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday of each month at the Columbus Government Center. In January of odd-numbered years, an organizational meeting and council meeting shall be held on the first Tuesday at 5:30 p.m. and regular meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday at 9:00 a.m. and the fourth Tuesday at 5:30 p.m. Except for such January meetings in odd-numbered years, a proclamation session shall be held by the mayor on the first Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. at the Columbus Government Center and attendance of councilors shall be optional at this session. In any month with a fifth Tuesday, a consent agenda shall be considered and a work session meeting shall be held on said fifth Tuesday at 9:00 a.m. at the Columbus Government Center. 
(Ord. No. 89-38, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 96-12, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 96-101, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 99-5, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 99-50, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 08-68, § 1, 12-9-08) 
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Pursuant to the duties of the mayor under the Columbus Charter to preside at all meetings of the Columbus Council, the mayor shall preserve order and decorum. 
(b)  In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside, and in his absence a chairman shall be appointed by the members of the council, vested with all powers of the mayor during his absence. 
(c)  Either the mayor or the Columbus Council may create committees for the purpose of inquiring into or making recommendations on matters within the scope of the mayor's or council's authority, and the mayor shall appoint the members of such committees unless the Council provides for other appointing authority. 
(d)  All persons desiring to appear before the Council of Columbus, Georgia, shall make written application to the Clerk of Council not later than 12:00 noon on Friday preceding the meeting, giving his or her name and the subject matter to be discussed. Said information may be faxed or delivered to the clerk by a third party. The Clerk of Council shall prepare an agenda for the Council and no person shall be allowed to speak unless on said agenda. Said individual shall be placed on the agenda next to the item to be addressed by the council at the time the item is called up to the mayor. A public agenda shall be prepared by the Clerk of Council and individuals shall be heard immediately after the city attorney's agenda upon recognition by the mayor. 
(e)  A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council will not be entertained unless it be made by a councilor who voted with the majority and such motion shall be made at the same or succeeding meeting. 
(f)  A point of order shall be decided by the Mayor subject to appeal to the whole council by motion and second of two members of council, but there shall be no suspension of the rules of council established in this section. 
(g)  A motion to table any matter shall be first in order, and motions to amend shall be made and voted on prior to motions for passage or defeat of an ordinance or resolution; a motion to amend an amendment shall be made and voted on prior to voting on the amendment which it addresses. 
(h)  A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. 
(i)  The Columbus Council shall by resolution or agreement adopt such order of business and such limitations on speaking times as it deems desirable, but no unreasonable or unlawful limitation on speaking time shall be imposed in zoning matters or when the council sits as a quasi-judicial body on such matters as license revocations. 
(j)  Consistent with the provision of the Columbus Charter requiring the affirmative vote of six members of the Columbus Council to enact an ordinance and consistent with provisions of Georgia law requiring the majority of the membership of a body to take action, at least six votes on all matters before the Columbus Council shall be required in order to take action. 
(k)  In addition to, but consistent with, existing rules of procedure contained in the Columbus Code of Ordinances or in the Columbus Charter, Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as rules of procedure for conducting meetings of the Columbus Council; but those rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order allowing certain votes of a majority of a quorum in order to take any action and requiring a two-third's vote for certain matters are not adopted. A copy of Robert's Rules of Order will be maintained in the office of the Clerk of the Columbus Council. 
(l)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, expressions of commendation or congratulations to citizens by the Columbus Council may be adopted by acclamation at monthly proclamation sessions held by the mayor and council on the first Tuesday of each month without necessity of official quorum of the Columbus Council. 
(Code 1914, § 801; Ord. No. 62-13, § 1, 2-5-62; Ord. No. 65-26, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. 72-28, § 1, 2-29-72; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1, 3-9-83; Ord. No. 89-13, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 97-131, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 98-82, 9-1-98; Ord. No. 11-9, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-3.01. - Recommendation and reports of board, committee, vote required. 
(a)  Boards, committees and other bodies appointed by the city council of the City of Columbus, be, and they are hereby required to obtain a majority vote of its entire composition before making any recommendation or report to the city council of the City of Columbus. 
(b)  The city council of the City of Columbus will not consider any recommendation or report of any board, committee, or other body appointed by the city council of the City of Columbus unless such report or recommendation has received a majority vote of the entire composition of such board, committee or other body appointed by the city council of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 70-133, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-70) 
Editor's note— Section 2-3.01 is derived from Ord. No. 70-133, §§ 1, 2, enacted May 25, 1970. This ordinance did not amend this Code. 
Sec. 2-3.02. - Qualification of board, commission and authority appointees; oath. 
(a)  Those persons (except salaried employees or salaried officials of the consolidated government who are designated to serve) appointed to boards, commissions and authorities of Columbus, Georgia, shall be residents and qualified registered voters of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Appointees to boards, commissions and authorities of Columbus, Georgia, before assuming the duties of their offices, shall take the following oath before the mayor of Columbus, Georgia (salaried employees or salaried officials of the consolidated government who are designated to serve may omit that portion of the oath which requires them to swear that they are residents and qualified voters of Columbus, Georgia): 
"I______________(name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am a resident and qualified registered voter of Columbus, Georgia, and that I will faithfully and impartially demean myself as a member of the ______________(name of board) during my continuance in office; that I will discharge my duties to the best of my ability; that I will do so agreeably with the laws of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and the Charter of Columbus, Georgia, so help me God." 
(Ord. No. 83-63, § 1, 7-26-83; Ord. No. 83-69, §§ 1, 2, 8-30-83) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 83-63, enacted July 26, 1983, repealed former § 2-3.02 and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new § 2-3.02 as herein set forth. Former § 2-3.02 pertained to the oath for board appointees and derived from Ord. No. 71-6, § 1, enacted Jan. 12, 1971. 
Sec. 2-3.03. - Procurement ordinance. 
There is hereby adopted for reference an ordinance entitled "Procurement Ordinance for the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia," which ordinance is not set out herein but is on file and available for reference in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 85-23, 3-5-85) 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, the procurement ordinance is not included herein and designation of the above provisions as § 2-3.03 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-3.04. - Voting by board, commission or authority members. 
No member of a board, commission or authority shall be allowed to vote upon any matter before the board, commission or authority in which such member has a financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 87-163, 11-24-87) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-163, adopted Nov. 24, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as § 2-3.04 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-3.05. - Submitting bids to consolidated government, etc.—By mayor or councilmembers. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the Columbus Council shall submit any bid to the consolidated government, nor shall the mayor or any member of the Columbus Council own or have a substantial pecuniary interest in any business that submits a bid to the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 92-60, 6-23-92) 
Sec. 2-3.06. - Same—By members of boards, authorities, commissions. 
No member of any board or authority or commission or other independent or subordinate entity of the consolidated government shall submit any bid to the consolidated government or have a substantial pecuniary interest in any business that submits a bid to the consolidated government if such bid pertains to the board or authority or commission on which such person holds such membership. 
(Ord. No. 92-61, 6-23-92) 
Sec. 2-3.07. - [Certain persons prohibited from candidacy for office.] 
No person employed by a grant recipient receiving general operating funds from the consolidated government and whose salary is paid from such funds shall qualify to run for public office in Muscogee County unless first resigning from employment with such grant recipient. This section shall not apply to elected seats on the Board of the Muscogee County School District. 
(Ord. No. 17-50, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 2-3.1. - Meetings of city boards, committees to be public; notice to news media; records to be public. 
(a)  All meetings held by boards or committees appointed by the city commission of the city shall be public meetings. 
(b)  All boards or committees appointed by the city commission of the city shall give notice of special called meetings to all news media who, pursuant to this section, have requested in writing to be notified. 
(c)  The notice required to be given to news media hereunder shall be given at the earliest possible moment and within a reasonable time from the time the notice is given to the members of the board or committee of the special called meeting. 
(d)  All news media desiring notice of special called meetings shall, in writing, request the board or committee to notify them of all called meetings. A copy of said writing shall be sent to the city manager of the city as well as to the board or committee. 
(e)  All citizens may have access to the minutes and records of boards or committees appointed by the city commission of the city at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 61-61, §§ 1—5, 6-26-61) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 61-61, §§ 1—5 enacted the provisions codified as § 2-3.1 above. Since said ordinance did not expressly amend this Code, the manner of codification has been in the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-3.2. - Nonbudgeted appropriations. 
(a)  $500.00 or less. The City of Columbus shall not make nonbudgeted appropriations of $500.00 or less, except by formal written resolution introduced at a meeting at least one week following the date upon which such appropriation is proposed. 
(b)  In excess of $500.00. The City of Columbus shall not make nonbudgeted appropriations in excess of $500.00 except by formal written ordinance introduced at a meeting at least one week following the date upon which such appropriation is proposed. 
(c)  Time frame for approval; exception. Except in cases where the city manager has notified the council on the city manager's agenda prior to the date of meeting, no nonbudgeted items may be approved for payment by the council until one week has elapsed after the presentation of such nonbudgeted item to the council. 
(Ord. No. 68-195, §§ 1, 2, 8-19-68; Ord. No. 72-226, § 1, 11-7-72) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 68-195, enacted Aug. 19, 1968, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1 and 2 of such ordinance as § 2-3.2(a) and (b) is at the discretion of the editor. Similarly, § 1 of Ord. No. 72-226, enacted Nov. 7, 1972, also did not specifically amend this Code and same was codified as § 2-3.2(c) at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-3.3. - Fiscal year designated. 
The fiscal year for the City of Columbus shall begin on the 1st day of July of each year and end on the last day of June of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 70-72, § 1, 3-23-70) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 70-72, § 1, was enacted as adding § 2-60 to this Code; however, to maintain the established format of Ch. 2, the editors redesignated said section as § 2-3.3. 
Sec. 2-3.4. - Report on affairs of city government. 
(a)  Required; scope. The city manager of the City of Columbus shall be, and he is hereby authorized to have prepared a presentation of the city's most important achievements and future needs, together with a full report of the activities of the city, its financial condition, its safety program, its public works, its water programs, its sanitary sewerage programs, its parks and recreation programs, its planning programs and the operation of its various departments. 
(b)  Frequency. This report to the people of the City of Columbus shall be done yearly after March 9, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 70-52, §§ 1, 2, 3-9-70) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 70-52 did not expressly amend this Code, hence codification of §§ 1 and 2 as § 2-3.4 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-3.5. - Purchase of budgeted items involving $2,500.00 or less. 
(a)  The department of finance, purchasing division, shall and it is hereby authorized to make purchases of budgeted items involving $2,500.00 or less without submission of such matters to the council for approval. 
(b)  Subordinate branches of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, administering budgeted funds, shall and they are hereby authorized to make purchases of budgeted items involving $2,500.00 or less without submission of such matters to the council for approval. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution of the Columbus Council, any purchase or expenditure from budgeted funds greater than $2,500.00, including any such expenditure for consultants or independent contractors providing professional, technical or other assistance, shall be approved by the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 83-20, §§ 3, 4, 3-29-83; Ord. No. 96-8, 1-30-96) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 83-20, enacted March 29, 1983, repealed Ord. No. 71-45, from which former § 2-3.5, pertaining to purchases of one thousand dollars or less, derived. Sections 3 and 4 of Ord. No. 83-20, which did not specifically amend this Code, have been included herein as a new § 2-3.5, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-3.6. - Disclosure of private interest of federal, state or local elected or appointed officials who contract with the consolidated government. 
Any federal, state or local elected or appointed official who shall have any private financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before the council or any office, department or agency of the consolidated government shall disclose such private interest to the council. Any contract between the consolidated government or any office, department, or agency thereof and any federal, state or local elected or appointed official shall be voidable or rescindable at the option of the consolidated government at any time if said official has any interest, direct or indirect, in said contract and does not disclose such interest to the council in regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 72-46, § 1, 4-4-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-46, § 1, did not amend this Code. Inclusion herein as § 2-3.6 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-3.7. - Approval of council required for appointed officials or employees to accept employment by, contract with, etc., unit or agency of federal, state or local government. 
No appointed official or employee of the consolidated government shall accept employment by, or contract with, any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or governmental agency, for services involving any transaction to which any unit or agency of federal, state, or local government is a party, without first obtaining in each case, the specific approval of the Council of Columbus, Georgia, by majority vote in an official council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 78-1, 1-3-78) 
Editor's note— Sec. 2-3.7 is derived from Ord. No. 78-1 which ordinance did not amend this Code. 
Sec. 2-4. - Insurance—Employees, participation required, deductions from wages. 
Whenever, and so long as, the city provides group life insurance for its officers and employees, it shall be an automatic condition of employment by the city that all persons eligible for such insurance shall be covered under such policy and the city shall automatically deduct [2] the proper premium from the compensation of each such eligible person and shall remit it directly to the insurance company. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons employed by the city, regardless of whether their employment commenced before or after the effective date hereof. Whenever and so long as the city provides group life insurance for its officers and employees, all persons eligible for such insurance, whether becoming officers or employees before or after the effective date hereof, shall be covered under such policy and the city shall automatically deduct the proper premium from the compensation of each eligible person and shall remit it directly to such insurance company. 
(Ord. of 5-1-54, § 3; Ord. of 5-25-54, § 1) 
Charter reference— As to life insurance, see § 244; as to hospitalization insurance, see § 245. 
State Law reference— For power of cities to act as trustees, See Ga. Code, § 69-502 which section is included in Part II of this Volume. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The ordinance from which this section is derived became effective on May 1, 1954, and deductions were taken thereunder commencing June 1, 1954. 

Sec. 2-5. - Same—Federal old age and survivors, employees brought within; regulations. 
(a)  Policy and purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city, effective January 1, 1956, to extend, under the agreement entered into by the State of Georgia and the Federal Security Administrator, to the employees and officials of the city and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this section, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of the 81st Congress, and as provided for in Act No. 734, Georgia Laws 1953, approved December 21, 1953 and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this policy, and for such purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  Plan and agreement. The mayor and the city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia and officials on behalf of the city as provided for in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  Withholdings authorized. Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials of the city for the purpose provided for in subsection (a) hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(d)  Appropriations. There is hereby appropriated from the pension and retirement fund of the city such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in subsection (b) of this section. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by said agency. 
(e)  Records. The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(f)  Exclusions. There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(g)  Coverage. The provisions and benefits of this ordinance [section 2-5 of this code] shall apply to all employees and officials of the city and its instrumentalities that are now or may hereafter be entitled to the benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, and amendments thereto, and specifically including within its provisions the members of the fire department and the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 56-6, §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 59-22) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 59-22, enacted April 20, 1959, amended Ord. No. 56-6, enacted March 6, 1956, to add a § 8 thereto which is hereinabove set out as § 2-5(g). 
Cross reference— For provisions relating to the fire and police departments see § 11-8 et seq. and ch. 17 respectively. 
Sec. 2-5.1. - Modification of original plan and agreement with Employees' Retirement System of Georgia. 
(a)  Ralph A. Sayers, city manager of the City of Columbus, be, and he is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original Plan and Agreement with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A", providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(b)  The City of Columbus, hereinafter referred to as "the city", agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, hereinafter called the state agency, in regard to collections from city employees and in making reports and payments to the state agency. 
(c)  The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Ord. No. 67-107, §§ 1—3, 6-12-67) 
Editor's note— Section 2-5.1 is derived from Ord. No. 67-107, §§ 1—3, adopted June 12, 1967. This ordinance, nonamendatory of this Code, was codified in the discretion of the editors. 
Secs. 2-6—2-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 2-6—2-9 requiring bond of city officers and specifying certain duties of the city marshal. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 82, 96—98. 
Sec. 2-10. - Recorder's court—Powers. 
It shall be the duty of the recorder of the city to hold a court to be called the "recorder's court", at such time and place within the city as he may order and appoint, for trial of all offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city; and he is hereby fully authorized to inflict such fines and penalties upon offenders as he may deem proper and just, not exceeding the limits allowed by law, or prescribed by ordinance, and to enforce the judgment of the court by the attachment of the person by execution; and to punish witnesses for nonattendance or other contempts as a court of record may do. 
The recorder is hereby authorized to allow any minor under 18 years of age who has been adjudged guilty of violating an ordinance of the City of Columbus, to serve such sentence on probation and in the custody of his or her parent, upon the signing of a bond by such parent to insure good behavior of such child during the period of probation, and the recorder is hereby authorized to decree such bond forfeit, when in his judgment such minor or such parent have not abided by the conditions required by the court for the acceptance of such bond. 
The recorder is hereby authorized to impose such alternative sentences in addition to fine and/or imprisonment as in his judgment may seem meet and proper, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Attendance of the traffic information program (TIP school) in cases involving driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(2)  That the offender shall receive such treatment and/or rehabilitation in cases involving driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs. 
(3)  That the offender receive such physical or psychological examination necessary to determine if such offender is a problem drinker or drug user. 
(Code 1914, § 631; Ord. No. 66-35, § 1, 3-14-66; Ord. No. 71-258, § 1, 9-28-71; Ord. No. 72-35, §§ 1—3, 3-21-72) 
Sec. 2-10.1. - Same—Presence of parent of minor charged with offense required. 
It shall be unlawful for a parent of any minor child who is charged with any offense requiring him or her to appear before recorder's court to fail to accompany such child before the recorder on the date said offense is heard. This provision shall be complied with if one of the parents of such minor child attend. 
The court is authorized to excuse the parent from attending or to compel by subpoena the attendance of such parent. 
(Ord. No. 66-34, § 1, 3-14-66; Ord. No. 80-66, § 1, 6-3-80) 
Sec. 2-11. - Same—Clerk; appointment, term, duties, salary. 
(a)  Creation of office. Pursuant to Columbus Charter section 5-605, there is hereby created the office of clerk of the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia. There shall be one or more deputy clerks serving in the recorder's court of Columbus, Georgia. 
(b)  Appointment. The clerk shall be appointed by the Columbus Council and may be removed for cause by the Columbus Council, subject to vested rights of any existing public safety personnel serving as clerk or deputy clerk. The senior recorder may recommend appointment or removal of the clerk, but such recommendation shall not be binding. 
(c)  Duties. The clerk shall prepare the court dockets, maintain all court records and shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the recorder's court. The clerk shall be the custodian of the official records of such court; attend all sessions of the court; certify to and affix the seal of the court to transcripts and official records of the court; be under the daily administrative supervision and direction of the senior recorder and other recorder's court judges in the absence of the senior recorder; and perform such acts in connection with his or her duties as may be required by law. 
(d)  Salary. The salary of the clerk or deputy clerks of the recorder's court shall be fixed by ordinance of the Columbus Council. 
(e)  Deputy clerks. Deputy clerks shall be appointed by the clerk of recorder's court and shall perform all duties of the court as assigned by the clerk or the senior recorder. Such deputy clerks shall be under the daily administrative supervision of the senior recorder and other recorder's court judges in their respective court sessions. Pending the illness or absence of the clerk or deputy clerks of the recorder's court, the senior recorder may appoint a clerk pro tempore or deputy clerks pro tem to perform the duties of the clerk or deputy clerk. 
(Code 1914, §§ 632, 633; Ord. of 5-3-49, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 11-43, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 2-12. - Same—Binding over defendant, bond. 
If, after an investigation of any case, it shall appear that the court has no jurisdiction to determine it, the recorder shall require the defendant to enter into bond, conditioned to appear before the next term of the court having jurisdiction, to answer for such offense, which bond shall be turned over to the proper officer of the court. In default of such bonds the recorder shall have power to commit the defendant to jail to answer the charge at the next term of the court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1914, § 634) 
Note— See Hargett vs. City of Columbus, 36, Ga. App. 628, 137 SE 911, for holding that statutory requirements were not meant by the filing in the Court of Appeals of the Recorder's certificate that the plaintiff in error had given bond in the certiorari from the Recorder's Court, where the plaintiff in error did not allege the giving of such bond in his petition. 
Sec. 2-13. - Same—Costs, payment to city. 
Costs arising in the recorder's court shall be paid into the city treasury, and the clerk and marshal of the city shall receive no costs, fee or prerequisites whatever for cases tried or reported to the recorder's court. 
(Code 1914, § 635) 
Sec. 2-14. - Same—Contempt; punishment. 
The recorder's court shall have power to issue attachments and inflict summary punishment for contempt of court. Such power shall not extend to any case except the misbehavior of any person in the presence of the court, or so near thereto as to obstruct the administration of justice, the misbehavior of any of the officers of the court in their official transactions and the disobedience or resistance by any officer of the court, party, witness or other person or persons to any lawful writ, process, order, rule or command of the court. 
The recorder's court shall have power to punish any person or persons in contempt as aforesaid as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1914, § 636) 
Note— See Salter vs. City of Columbus, 125 Ga. 96, 54 SE 74, for holding that no injunction will lie against the institution of proceedings for the violation of a municipal ordinance. 
Sec. 2-15. - Same—Appearance bond, forfeiture. 
In all cases where a person charged with the violation of this Code or an ordinance of the city or a law of the State of Georgia shall give bond for his appearance before the recorder's court, or where a person summoned to appear before said court as a witness shall give bond for his appearance, and it shall become necessary, to forfeit such bonds for the failure of such person to appear, the mode of procedure shall be as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Calling case, entry. The recorder shall call all cases on his docket. If, upon such call, any person of the class designated in the preceding paragraph hereof shall fail to appear at the time specified in the summons, the appearance bond executed by such person shall at once be forfeited, and the recorder shall make an entry of forfeiture on the page of his docket where such case is entered. The form of the entry of forfeiture shall state that the case was called at the time specified in the summons, that the party summoned failed to appear when the case was called, that the bond is forfeited, and such entry shall be dated and signed by the recorder. 
(2)  Forfeiture revoked by surrender of  principal. [3] 
Bail may surrender their principal to the chief of police, or any subordinate officer or member of the police department designated by the chief, within seven days after the date of forfeiture and such surrender shall relieve the sureties of the penalty of the bond upon the payment of cost. It shall be discretionary with the recorder whether the time be extended. In no event shall an extension be granted for more than 30 days. In all cases, any motion for revocation of a forfeiture upon surrender shall be made in writing during the seven day period, or such time as is extended pursuant hereto. 
(3)  Collection. At the expiration of the period of time set forth in subsection two, the procedure for collection of the amount of the bond shall be as follows: 
(a)  If the bond is one in which cash has been deposited with the police department of the city without a personal security, the cash so deposited shall be paid immediately into the treasury of the city. 
(b)  If the bond is one which has been signed by the defendant principal with surety or sureties (personal or corporate), the city clerk shall immediately issue execution against the principal and surety or sureties on such bond. The execution shall be directed to the city marshal who shall proceed immediately to collect the amount of the execution, with costs, in the manner in which executions for ad valorem taxes due the city are collected. 
(c)  If the bond is one in which the officer of the police department authorized to allow bail and fix the bond, determines, in his discretion, that it is safe to permit the accused to sign a bond without providing further security, the city clerk shall immediately issue execution against the party signing such bond, which execution shall be directed and enforced as provided in subsection (b) hereof. 
(4)  Officer authorized to fix bail. The officers of the police department of the city authorized to approve the bond of one arrested and brought before such department shall be the chief of police, a captain of the police department or a sergeant of the department. This authority shall exist in the order named and shall devolve upon whichever one of such officers is the highest ranking officer on duty at police headquarters at the time the party arrested is admitted to bail. 
(5)  Disqualification of surety. Where any person (including any corporation) hereafter executes as security a bond calling for the appearance of a person before the recorder's court, either as defendant or as a witness, and fails to pay the amount of the bond when forfeited, such person shall not be accepted as security on other bonds providing for appearance in the court until he has paid the entire amount outstanding against him because of his failure to pay the amount of a forfeited bond. No person who has failed to pay the appropriate city license tax shall be accepted as security on a bond providing for appearance of a person before the recorder's court, either as defendant or as a witness, under circumstances which would render such person liable for a city license tax because of such suretyship. 
(6)  Refund of cash. Where the bond is one in which cash has been deposited with the police department of the city, the cash shall be refunded to the person so depositing it when the principal in the bond has complied with its terms or whenever a forfeiture of a bond has been revoked in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(7)  Right to suit. Nothing in this section relating to the forfeiture of bonds is to take from the city its right to enforce such bonds by suit thereon. 
(Ord. of 7-17-51, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8; Ord. No. 58-76; Ord. No. 59-9, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 61-107, § 1, 12-27-61) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 61-107, § 1, enacted December 27, 1961, amended § 2-15 by adding the authority for recorder to extend the time for revocation of forfeiture in subsection (2) above. 

Sec. 2-15.1. - Same—Sentence diversion program for substance abuse offenses. 
(a)  Whenever the recorder's court receives a plea of guilty or adjudicates guilt for any violation of a city ordinance or state statute incorporated for sentencing purposes in the recorder's court relating to the possession of a narcotic drug, marijuana, or stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drug, with the exception of such offenses that involve driving under the influence, judgment may be entered in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2; and further implementation of such judgment shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2. 
(b)  Whenever disposition of a substance abuse case is made under the provisions of subsection (a) the defendant shall have 72 hours to report to a designated assessment center for evaluation to determine their substance abuse lifestyle. Contingent upon the results of the initial assessment, the defendant shall be referred to a substance abuse educational program that addresses the individual needs of the defendant. This program shall consist of no less than three months and no more than six months of substance abuse education, referral for substance abuse treatment, if necessary, and monitoring, to include random substance abuse testing. All costs, to include court costs, assessment fees and substance abuse testing fees, shall be paid by the defendant, unless the defendant is declared by the court to be an indigent, in which case alternative arrangements may be provided by the court. Upon successfully completing the program, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against him. 
(Ord. No. 90-79, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-79, adopted Aug. 28, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 of § 2-15.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-15.2. - Same—Charges for dismissing cases, appealing judgements. 
The following charges are established: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  A charge of $25.00 for appealing a recorder's court judgement. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 97-57, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 16-43, § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 2-16. - Jurors excused from parking regulations. 
(a)  Jurors on duty in the courts of Columbus are hereby excused from parking restrictions in legal parking areas on public streets according to the following regulations: 
(1)  A juror who leaves his summons for service visible to an inspecting officer will not be given a violation ticket by such officer on the date shown on such summons. 
(2)  Should a parking summons be left on such juror's automobile the same may be validated by the jury manager whose validation stamp shall show that the juror was on duty at the time the parking summons was issued. 
(b)  The jury manager is authorized to return such summons to the police department or have the same returned in satisfaction of the obligation of the juror to appear. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-15, adopted Feb. 19, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1 and 2 of said ordinance as § 2-16 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-17. - Environmental court division. 
The environmental court division of recorder's court is hereby created. An environmental court docket shall be heard at both a morning and afternoon session on the first Wednesday of each month and shall be heard at both a morning and afternoon session on the third Wednesday of each month in the recorder's court. The cases heard shall include, but shall not be limited to, the attached list of environmental ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 02-75, § 1, 7-23-02; Ord. No. 02-117, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 03-59, § 1, 7-22-03) 
Sec. 2-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 2-16—2-18, relative to bonds or insurance on city or housing authority contracts, were repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Ord. of July 17, 1939, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Aug. 14, 1939; and Ord. of Nov. 19, 1954, §§ 1, 2. Sections 2-16 and 2-17 have since been reused. 
Sec. 2-18.1. - City-owned vehicles; use by employees when off duty prohibited; exception. 
(a)  Employees of the city are hereby prohibited from using vehicles of the city when they are not on duty, and employees shall not carry vehicles of the city home with them at night when they are not on duty. 
(b)  Employees who are on 24-hour call are excepted from the provisions of this section, provided special permission is obtained yearly from the city commission, authorizing the use of city vehicles by such employees. 
(Ord. No. 59-47, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Section 2-18.1, derived from Ord. No. 59-47, enacted August 31, 1959, and effective September 30, 1959, did not amend this Code, hence it has been codified as said section at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.2. - Automobile allowances for employees. 
Whenever any employee who is receiving a car allowance retires or otherwise vacates his position, the council, and, particularly, the budget review committee, will immediately make an evaluation of whether or not any provisions for an automobile allowance should be continued; and, in the absence of any specific action by the Columbus Council continuing the provision for automobile allowances, such automobile allowance shall be automatically discontinued for the position vacated. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, 4-4-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-35, adopted April 4, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion as § 2-18.2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-18.3. - Information relative to subcontractors required in bids to city. 
(a)  The bid for any contract with the City of Columbus or subordinate branch thereof, by any general contractor who has in turn received bids from any subcontractor involving ten percent of his total bid for a portion of such work, shall contain information relating thereto, setting forth the subcontractor's name and address, and the portion of such contract as is to be let to said subcontractor. 
(b)  Failure to so list said subcontractor's bid will invalidate the bid of the general contractor. 
(Ord. No. 63-79, §§ 1, 2, 9-30-63) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-79 was not enacted as a part of this Code, but is included herein as § 2-18.3 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-18.4. - Engineering department—To screen all engineering work before employment of outside firms. 
(a)  The engineering department of Columbus, Georgia, will handle all engineering for all departments of the city that it is capable of doing. 
(b)  Before any outside engineering firm is employed by any department, board or authority of the city for any public work in the city, the engineering department of the city will make a finding as to its ability to handle such engineering work, shall report its finding to the Council of Columbus, Georgia, with its recommendations as to the need of outside engineering firms being employed, such report indicating such portion of such project as the engineering department of Columbus is able to handle itself. 
(Ord. No. 72-16, §§ 1, 2, 2-15-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-16, §§ 1 and 2, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 2-18.4 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.4.1. - Same—Fee system for services. 
(a)  A fee system is hereby established for the engineering department for services provided to persons and organizations. 
(b)  The engineering department shall provide services which include, but are not limited to, review of plans and other submitted data for approval of applications for permits for site development, soil erosion control, flood plain management, work on public rights-of-way, engineering investigations and processing requests for easement encroachments/abandonments, and inspections of construction and compliance with standards, ordinances and regulations. Due to variability of fuel, construction and material costs and that the sign material bids have changed every 90 days, the department of engineering will be reviewing the bid every four months and based on the most current prices, adjust the cost of signs if needed with the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  A nonrefundable fee payment shall be submitted with plans and application with fees based on the following fee schedule: 
(1)  Commercial/subdivision development: 
Urban: Up to 10 acres + $40.00 per additional acre (over 10 acres) ..... $400.00 
Rural: Per lot ..... 20.00 
(2)  Minor land-disturbing activities ..... 50.00 
(3)  Work on right-of-way ..... 50.00 
(4)  Easement encroachment/abandonment investigations ..... 50.00 
(5)  Advertisements for street closings ..... 25.00 
(6)  Street name signs in new subdivisions and replacement of existing signs due to accidents, vandalism, etc. (each) ..... 250.00 
(7)  Traffic signs in new subdivisions and replacement of existing signs due to accidents, vandalism, etc. (each) ..... 125.00 
(8)  Request for traffic data ..... 100.00 
(9)  Geographical information systems: 
Faxing, per page ..... 2.00 
Parcel map (8½" × 11"), overlays included ..... 7.00 
Parcel map (11" × 17"), overlays included ..... 7.00 
Tax map 42" × 34" (E size), overlays included 
Black and white ..... 15.00 
Color ..... 35.00 
GIS data: On CD only, for tax parcel data, personal geodatabase format only ..... 210.00 
Each additional layer, i.e. zoning, land use, topography, streets, etc. ..... 200.00 
2004 aerial photography, per tile, approx. 200 tiles, on CD or DVD only ..... 10.00 
Full map set adobe PDF, includes tax maps with zoning updated quarterly ..... 210.00 
Each additional layer overlay, aerial and topography ..... 200.00 
Map/data customization, per hour, 2 hour minimum ..... 65.00 
Shipping and handling, included in map fee, regular mail only 
GIS website subscription, basic access ..... Free 
Premium level access, per month ..... 25.00 
Per year ..... 250.00 
Professional level access, per month ..... 40.00 
Per year ..... 400.00 
(Ord. No. 91-49, §§ 1—3, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 97-138, §§ 1—3, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 01-30, §§ I—III, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 06-101, §§ I—III, 11-7-06) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-49, adopted June 18, 1991 did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—3 as § 2-18.4.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-18.5. - Housing authority to exercise urban redevelopment powers. 
(a)  As herein used, "urban redevelopment project powers" shall be the urban redevelopment project powers particularized and defined in the Georgia Urban Redevelopment Law (Chapter 69-11 of Georgia Code Annotated); "municipality" shall mean the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia; and "the urban renewal plans" shall mean those certain urban renewal plans for NDP Urban Renewal Area No. 1 (southwest Columbus) and NDP Urban Renewal Area No. 2 (Weracoba Creek) as heretofore approved by the Council of Columbus, Georgia by Resolution No. 493-71 and as henceforth amended by proper authority. 
(b)  It is hereby deemed and determined to be in the public interest that the urban redevelopment project powers of the municipality be exercised by the housing authority of Columbus, Georgia, for all purposes of the urban renewal plans, to the fullest extent necessary for said housing authority to execute, effectuate, comply with and carry out said urban renewal plans in every respect; and the Council of Columbus, Georgia, expressly elects to have such urban redevelopment project powers exercised accordingly by the housing authority of Columbus, Georgia, subject only to the limitations specified in Section 69-1115(b) of Georgia Code Annotated. 
(c)  Any and all acts and things heretofore done or undertaken by said housing authority in the exercise of any such urban redevelopment project powers with respect to said urban renewal plans are hereby expressly ratified and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 72-36, §§ 1—3, 3-21-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-36, §§ 1—3, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 2-18.5 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.6. - Approval required for receipt of salaries allocated under grants. 
Salaries of city employees, including the airport commission employees, and any other agency which receives monies from the city, shall not be supplemented by the value of the service they render to a grant program thereby constituting a raise in pay for the same service rendered the city, unless approved by majority vote of the council. This shall cover compensation to employees, from the effective date of this section, including such employees who are now receiving such additional compensation, but shall not require the repayment of any sums heretofore paid. 
(Ord. No. 72-178, § 1, 9-12-72; Ord. No. 78-65, § 5, 5-23-78) 
Sec. 2-18.7. - Examination, evaluation and approval of compensation of employees administrating programs financed by state or federal government. 
Each and every change in the pay rate of employees of the consolidated government, including employees serving elected officials, special projects, and grant-in-aid programs for the benefit of the general government which may be financed in whole or in part by the State of Georgia or the United States of America, shall be examined, evaluated, and approved by the city manager of Columbus, Georgia. This requirement shall be in addition to, rather than in lieu of, existing requirements for review and approval by the director of administration, personnel officer, department heads and other officials. 
(Ord. No. 72-179, § 1, 9-12-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-179, § 1, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 2-18.7 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.8. - Review and approval of grant applications. 
(a)  All organizational units of the consolidated government of Columbus, all independent agencies whose existence is dependent upon a finding of need and necessity by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, all projects and programs of such agencies which are dependent upon the finding of need and necessity by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, and all persons, firms, corporations or agencies receiving appropriations from Columbus, Georgia, shall file with the office of the mayor and the Council of Columbus, Georgia, all grant applications for review comment, and approval before the final application is made. 
(b)  All other persons, firms, corporations or agencies sponsoring federal or state assisted programs for the citizens of this government are requested to file with the office of the mayor and the Council of Columbus, Georgia, such grant applications for review, and comment, before the final application is made. 
(Ord. No. 72-180, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-180, §§ 1 and 2, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 2-18.8 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.9. - Disposition of general revenue sharing funds. 
All funds allocated to Columbus, Georgia under "State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972," and received from the department of the treasury shall be deposited into separate accounts which shall be entitled "General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund Account;" and such funds shall be withdrawn, expended and appropriated pursuant only to a resolution or resolutions of the Council of Columbus, Georgia. Such resolutions of the council may cover a single item, group of items, or items within a written plan included in such resolution. 
(Ord. No. 72-245, § 1, 12-19-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-254 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of § 1 herein as § 2-18.9 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.10. - Authorized expenditures for councilors in the performance of official business. 
(a)  Councilors are hereby authorized the same reimbursement for expenses incurred for travel as well as other expenditures while in the performance of their duties as councilors and as appointees for boards, commissions and committees as the same are reimbursable by other officers and employees when on city business. 
(b)  Councilors are hereby authorized to notify the Clerk of Council of any anticipated travel covered hereunder so that the Clerk of Council may make a record thereof in advance of such authorized travel. 
(Ord. No. 73-164, §§ 1, 2, 11-27-73) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 73-164, §§ 1 and 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 2-18.10 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-18.11. - United States Bicentennial Trust Fund established; board of trustees. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of trustees of the United States Bicentennial Trust Fund to consist of the curator of the Infantry Museum of Fort Benning, Georgia, and six other members, one of whom shall be nominated by the president of Columbus College, one of whom shall be nominated by the superintendent of the Muscogee County School District, one of whom shall be nominated by the chairman of the Board of the Historic Columbus Foundation, one of whom shall be nominated by the Board of the Historic District Preservation Society, one of whom shall be appointed by the mayor of Columbus, Georgia, and one member to be appointed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. Each of the named nominating officials may submit as many nominations as they deem feasible from which nomination the Council of Columbus, Georgia shall select one or ask such nominating officials for additional nominations. Should such nominating officials fail to nominate within 30 days of a vacancy, the Council of Columbus, Georgia may fill such vacancy by its own nomination and election. 
(b)  The members of said board of trustees shall serve graduated terms of from one to seven years and until the successors are named and appointed, which terms shall be drawn by lot at the first meeting to be called by the mayor of Columbus, Georgia. Subsequent terms shall be seven years or until their successors are named and appointed with no member eligible to succeed himself. The original terms less than seven years in duration shall be considered terms of office with no member eligible to succeed himself. 
(c)  The said board of trustees shall be and hereby is charged to create, develop, construct and preserve a commemorative historic promenade of suitable design and character with displays and exhibits upon appropriate public or publicly controlled sites to include proper and fitting markers, tablets, structures, visual and audible educational units, landscaping and such other items and things as they deem consistent with the purpose of this section, and such other projects of like character as to said board may seem meet and proper. 
(d)  The said board of trustees may receive and disburse public and private funds and other contributions for the aforesaid purposes and such funds shall constitute the U.S. Bicentennial Trust Fund of Columbus, Georgia. The said trust fund may be expended for capital improvement only including construction, beautification and installations as stipulated herein. An annual audit report of the funds shall be filed with the clerk of Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(e)  Upon the recommendation of said board, the Council of Columbus, Georgia, may authorize the use, acquisition, or lease of lands or buildings or both, within or beyond the corporate limits of Columbus, Georgia, and such lands or buildings may be dedicated, set apart, acquired or leased for such purposes as outlined herein as a part of the parks, playground and recreational facilities authorized by section 69-602 of the Code of Georgia. 
(f)  The officials and officers of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, are authorized and directed to cooperate and assist the board of trustees. These activities are hereby ordained to be a governmental function under the authorization of Section 69-602 of the Code of Georgia, as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 74-91, §§ 1—6, 5-14-74; Ord. No. 77-117, § 1, 8-30-88) 
Sec. 2-18.12. - Deposit of certificates of insurance in lieu of policies of insurance or certified copies of policies; notification of policy coverage changes or policy cancellation. 
(a)  In all cases where ordinances of Columbus, Georgia, require the deposit of policies of insurance or certified copies of policies of insurance with the Clerk of Council, said companies shall instead be permitted to deposit certificates of insurance which shall show that the company has the coverage required by the applicable ordinance. 
(b)  Provided, that the certificate of insurance shall include, or there shall be affixed thereto, a statement by the insurer that Columbus, Georgia, will be notified within 30 days of any change in the coverage of the policy or of the cancellation of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 78-107, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-78) 
Editor's note— Section 2-18.12 is derived from Ord. No. 78-107, §§ 1, 2, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code. 
Sec. 2-18.13. - Common redevelopment agency for Columbus. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-44-4, the Council of Columbus, Georgia is hereby designated as the common redevelopment agency for Columbus, Georgia and may exercise all redevelopment powers authorized by O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 44. Concurrently, the Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia is hereby delegated authority to perform various functions and duties required by the Redevelopment Powers Law on behalf of the Council of Columbus, Georgia except for those functions which are prohibited from delegation by O.C.G.A. § 36-44-6(b). The specific functions and duties to be delegated will be set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding to be entered into between Columbus, Georgia and the Development Authority of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 15-51, § 1, 10-27-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-51, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2015, adopted provisions intended for use as § 2-66; however, because § 2-66 already exists in the Code, and at the city's instruction, said provisions have been included herein as § 2-18.13. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 03-76, § 18, enacted September 16, 2003, removed and renumbered former ch. 2, art. II, §§ 2-19—2-23, pertaining to the department of emergency management, to ch. 11, art. VI, §§ 11-46—11-50. 

Secs. 2-19—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-26. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this article, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances or other official documents are on file in the office of the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 11-56, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Sec. 2-27. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in Columbus/Muscogee County and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for Columbus/Muscogee County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of Columbus/Muscogee County to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the clerk of the Columbus City Council a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The Columbus City Council may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
(A)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate Columbus/Muscogee County emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for development of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
The Emergency Management Division, Columbus Fire and Emergency Medical Services ("EMA") Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the Emergency Management Division, Columbus Fire and Emergency Medical Services, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of Columbus/Muscogee County; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the Columbus City Council. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Columbus/Muscogee County who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(B)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: subsection [(n)] (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and subsection [(p)] (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the Columbus City Council and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
(C)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the Columbus City Council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of [subsection (a)(4)] as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the Columbus City Council. 
(D)  Additional emergency powers. The mayor shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters. 
To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any Columbus/Muscogee County departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
To utilize all available resources of Columbus/Muscogee County and subordinate agencies over which Columbus/Muscogee County has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of Columbus/Muscogee County business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any Columbus/Muscogee County agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; and 
To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
[(b)]  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of Columbus/Muscogee County Clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this article which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Columbus/Muscogee County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of Columbus/Muscogee County, with advice from the Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Columbus/Muscogee County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That Columbus/Muscogee County Emergency Management Division, Columbus Fire and Emergency Medical Services activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
That the following sections of Columbus/Muscogee County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Registration of Building and Repair Services to be effective only if the Governor has declared a state of emergency; and/or Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
That the following measures also be implemented: ENTERED at [time] on [date]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, Columbus, Georgia Consolidated Government" 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in Columbus/Muscogee County's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the Columbus Council may contract with any county or municipality in Georgia or Alabama for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(d)  Enforcement and remedies law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the Muscogee County Sheriff's Office and the Columbus Police Department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and implemented by the mayor or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(e)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the mayor or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act or this article, and which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(g)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article may be enforced by the Muscogee County Sheriff's Office, the Columbus Police Department, the Municipal Court Marshal's Office or the EMA director. 
(h)  Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of Columbus/Muscogee County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of Columbus/Muscogee County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of Columbus/Muscogee County, all actions taken by the Columbus Council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Columbus/Muscogee County. Such meetings may be called by the mayor or any two members of the Columbus Council without regard to or compliance with formalities otherwise required by law. 
(i)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the Columbus Council may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract as required by law; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the Columbus Council as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(j)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. Columbus/Muscogee County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(k)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the Columbus Council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of Columbus/Muscogee County, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Columbus Code or applicable law is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(l)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the Columbus Council may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by Columbus/Muscogee County for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by Columbus/Muscogee County on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by Columbus/Muscogee County pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(m)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the Columbus Council or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by Unified Development Ordinance or other applicable law, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by Columbus/Muscogee County Health Department and the Columbus Inspections and Code Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the Columbus Council, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and any extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(n)  Registration of building and repair services. 
(1)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of Columbus/Muscogee County designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with Columbus/Muscogee County Inspections and Code Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in Columbus/Muscogee County without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $100.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
Name of applicant; 
Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
Georgia business license number, if required; 
Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required. 
(o)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the Columbus Council, the provisions of this article shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(p)  Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with Columbus/Muscogee County emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
Authorized and essential health care providers; 
Authorized and essential personnel of Columbus/Muscogee County; 
Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
Authorized and essential firefighters; 
Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through Columbus/Muscogee County Emergency Management Division, Columbus Fire and Emergency Medical Services (EMA); 
Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; or 
Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the director of public safety and/or the Sheriff of Muscogee County. 
(q)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(r)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(s)  Regulations continued in effect. All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this article are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of Columbus/Muscogee County Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 11-56, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Secs. 2-28—2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT IN EMERGENCY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Art. IV, §§ 2-50—2-56, is derived from Ord. No. 66-212, §§ 1—7, adopted and effective October 31, 1966. As said ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code, the manner of codification has been at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 2-50. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Continuity of Government Ordinance of the City of Columbus". 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 1, 10-31-66) 
Sec. 2-51. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates: 
Attack shall mean any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the United States in any manner, by sabotage or by the use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological, or biological means or other weapons or processes. 
Duly authorized deputy shall mean a person who is presently authorized to perform all of the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of an office in the event the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent officer. 
Emergency interim successor shall mean a person designated pursuant to this article for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of a city officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
Unavailable shall mean either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a vacancy) and his duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 2, 10-31-66) 
Sec. 2-52. - Designation, status, qualifications and term of emergency interim successors. 
(a)  Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this article [6] and thereafter within 30 days after the re-organization of the city government in January, the city commission of the City of Columbus shall appoint three emergency interim successors to fill the positions of members of the city commission, the city clerk, the city attorney, the city manager, and the recorders court judge, and shall designate and specify their rank in order of succession. 
(b)  Appointive officers. The city manager and the acting safety director shall, within the time specified in subsection (a) of this section, in addition to any duly authorized emergency interim successor designated for appointive officers including chief of police, chief of the fire department, and all department heads of the city, appoint three emergency interim successors to these offices and such appointment shall specify their rank in order of succession and all such appointed positions which, under the provisions of the Charter of the City of Columbus, are required to be approved by the city commission of the City of Columbus or to be approved by the safety board of the City of Columbus, and shall be submitted for approval by the city manager or acting safety director within the time specified in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  Office of mayor. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, recognizing the duties of the office of the mayor to govern by proclamation where a quorum is not present, interim successors positions to succeed to the office of mayor are hereby listed in the following order: 
(1)  The duly elected mayor pro tem shall assume the duties of mayor. 
(2)  In the event the mayor and the mayor pro tem are neither available, the duly elected member of the city commission having the longest period of service on the commission as a commissioner shall assume the duties of mayor. 
(d)  Qualifications. No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim successor unless he may under the Constitution and Statutes of this State and the Charter or Ordinances of this city, hold the office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to succeed, but no provision of any ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of this city from holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 3, 10-31-66) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— The effective date is October 31, 1966. 

Sec. 2-53. - Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency interim successor. 
If in the event of an attack any officer named in subsections (a) and (b) of section 2-52 of this article and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable, his emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of succession who is not unavailable shall, except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successors, exercise the powers and discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or any duly authorized deputy or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as provided by law, provided however, that in the exercise of duties of the council, no emergency interim successor shall be authorized to vote until and unless there are not enough duly elected councilors present to conduct the business of the city under the provisions of the charter. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 4, 10-31-66) 
Sec. 2-54. - Recording and publication. 
The name, address, and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized emergency interim successor shall be filed with the city clerk and each designation, replacement, or change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become effective thereupon. The city clerk shall keep on file all such data regarding duly authorized emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 5, 10-31-66) 
Sec. 2-55. - Formalities of taking office. 
At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may succeed. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 6, 10-31-66) 
Sec. 2-56. - Change in appointments. 
Any change in the emergency interim successor appointments authorized hereunder shall be furnished to the civil defense director by the city clerk of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 66-212, § 7, 10-31-66) 
Secs. 2-57—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-76, adopted May 2, 1972, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 2-61—2-65, was at the discretion of the editors. Catchlines were added by the editors for the purpose of facilitating indexing, reference and use. 

Sec. 2-61. - Need for and purpose of authority determined. 
There be and there is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, Ga. Laws 1969 p. 137) to function in Columbus, Georgia, for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in said political subdivision thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 72-76, 5-2-72) 
Sec. 2-62. - Authority activated. 
There be and there is hereby activated in Columbus, Georgia, the public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law and particularly Section 2 thereof. 
(Ord. No. 72-76, 5-2-72) 
Sec. 2-63. - Election, term of board of directors. 
There be and there are hereby elected as members of the first board of directors of the Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia the following named persons, each of whom is a taxpayer of Columbus, Georgia and none of whom is an officer or employee of said political subdivision: 

 
Commencing with the date of adoption of this article [May 2, 1972] by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, each of said persons named as directors above shall serve in such capacity for the number of years set forth opposite their respective names, and if at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-62-4, appointees to the Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia shall serve for terms of four years. Appointees may serve, when applicable, through expiration of a current term vacated for any reason and for an additional two consecutive full terms. 
(Ord. No. 72-76, 5-2-72; Ord. No. 78-65, § 5, 5-23-78; Ord. No. 14-42, § 1, 8-26-14) 
Sec. 2-63.1. - Term for downtown development authority. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-42-4, the term of any member of the Downtown Development Authority of Columbus, Georgia shall be four years. Appointees may serve, when applicable, through expiration of a current term vacated for any reason and for an additional two consecutive full terms. Any provision of the Columbus Code or uncodified ordinance in conflict with this Code section is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 14-42, § 2, 8-26-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-42, § 2, adopted Aug. 26, 2014, amended the code by adding provisions intended for use as Section 2-65.1. As Section 2-65.1 already exists, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Section 2-63.1. 
Sec. 2-64. - Organization, duties and responsibilities, powers and prerogatives of board of directors. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Ord. No. 72-76, 5-2-72) 
Sec. 2-65. - Secretary of state to be furnished certified copy of provisions. 
The Clerk of Council shall furnish immediately to the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia a certified copy of this article in compliance with the mandate set forth in Section 2 of the Development Authorities Law. 
(Ord. No. 72-76, 5-2-72) 
ARTICLE V½. - ENABLING THE CREATION OF URBAN SERVICE DISTRICTS WITH AVAILABLE MILLAGE RATE ABATEMENT 
[8]
Footnotes: 

Sec. 2-65.1. - Findings of necessary conditions, definitions, and criteria for millage rate abatement. 
(a)  The Columbus Council finds that certain districts in Columbus, Georgia have not been subject to growth and development through private enterprise and would not reasonably be anticipated to be developed without the approval of new urban service districts which include a district redevelopment plan to improve property values, reduce poverty, reduce unemployment, relieve general distress and blight, and to relieve a substantial lack of economic development. Such districts may also include one or more natural, historical, or cultural assets which have not been adequately preserved or protected and such asset or assets would not reasonably be anticipated to be adequately preserved, protected, or improved without the approval of new urban service districts and appropriate urban service district redevelopment plans. Urban service districts may be created by the Columbus Council pursuant to Columbus Charter Section 1-103 and the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Each urban service district must be created by an ordinance which includes a plat of the district and a district redevelopment plan. All parcels included in any urban service district must abut and may not contain a noncontiguous parcel. Each district so approved shall meet three or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  The improvement of some real property in the district is likely to enhance the value of a substantial portion of the other real property in the district. 
(2)  Pervasive poverty shall be evidenced in the district by showing that poverty is widespread throughout the district and shall be established by using the following criteria: 
a.  The poverty rate shall be determined from the data in the most current of the United States decennial census prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Census or the American Community Survey and must be at least 13 percent of the residents of the district; 
b.  Census geographic block groups with no population shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets the standards of subparagraph A. above. 
(3)  Unemployment shall be evidenced in the district by the use of data published by the Office of Labor Information Systems of the Georgia Department of Labor indicating that the average rate of unemployment for the district for the preceding calendar year is at least ten percent higher than the state average rate of unemployment or by evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the district such as the closing of a manufacturing plant or federal facility. 
(4)  General distress in the district shall be evidenced by adverse conditions within the district other than those of pervasive poverty and unemployment. Examples of such adverse conditions include, but are not limited to, a high incidence of crime, abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure, and substantial population decline. 
(5)  Underdevelopment in the district shall be evidenced by data indicating development activities, or lack thereof, through land disturbance permits, business license fees, building permits, development fees or other similar data indicating that the level of development in the district is lower than development activity within the consolidated government. 
(6)  General distress and blight shall be present in the district and shall be defined as follows: 
a.  The presence of structures, buildings, or improvements that by reasons of dilapidation; deterioration; age; obsolescence; inadequate provision from ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open space; overcrowding; conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes; or any combination of such factors are conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, high unemployment, juvenile delinquency, or crime and are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare; 
b.  The presence of a predominant number of substandard, vacant, deteriorated, or deteriorating structures; the predominance of a defective or inadequate street layout or transportation facilities; or faulty lot layout in relation to size, accessibility, or usefulness; 
c.  Evidence of pervasive poverty, defined as being greater than ten percent of the population in the area as determined by unemployment rate that is ten percent higher than the state average; 
d.  Adverse effects of airport or transportation related noise or environmental contamination or degradation or other adverse environmental factors; or 
e.  The existence of conditions through any combination of the foregoing that substantially impair the sound growth of the community and retard the provision of housing accommodations or employment opportunities. 
(c)  The owner of each parcel or group of parcels in a designated urban service district may file an application on a form prescribed by the director the department of community reinvestment ("the director") for a temporary millage rate abatement on its real property ad valorem taxes for a period not to exceed ten years as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section below. For each application seeking a millage rate abatement, the director, will convene a panel consisting of the deputy city manager for planning and development and the director of the planning department, or their designees, to review the application and make an initial determination as to whether or not the planned acquisition and construction or rehabilitation of the property meets the definition of a significant impact project, moderate impact project or light impact project as defined below. Upon determination of the applicable millage rate abatement category or that the project does not qualify for a millage rate abatement, the director will notify the owner or agent of the panel's recommendation, and unless the application is withdrawn in writing within five business days, the director will present that recommendation to Council at its next meeting for its acceptance or rejection. At the time of the presentation, the owner or interested parties to the transaction may also be heard. After approval of any millage rate abatement by council, the owner or his/her agent will negotiate and enter into a developer agreement with the director which will contain ascertainable goals and requirements for each year of the project for which a millage rate abatement is sought and will specify the conditions triggering the first year of the millage rate abatement as well as penalties or other provisions for the recapture of millage rate abatements in the event the goals and requirements of the agreement are not met. 
(d)  The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this article: 
(1)  Significant impact projects. New construction, adaptive reuse, or renovation with significant rehabilitation that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  At least 100 additional single family dwelling units; or 
b.  A mixed income development with at least 75 additional multifamily and single family dwelling units with a minimum affordable housing set aside of ten percent; or 
c.  Mixed use development that includes commercial and residential wherein no fewer than 20 new permanent jobs are created and the residential component has an affordable housing set aside of at least ten percent. 
(2)  Moderate impact projects. New construction, adaptive reuse, or renovation of an existing building that meets one or both of the following criteria: 
a.  No fewer than 20 new permanent jobs will be created or maintained in the District; provided however, in order for maintained rather than created jobs to meet this criteria, 35 percent of the project investment will finance exterior renovation, or 
b.  At least 50 new residential dwelling units are developed with a minimum affordable housing set aside of ten percent. 
(3)  Light impact projects. A significant renovation or rehabilitation project which upgrades, replaces or improves a residential or commercial structure, and meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Restores or renovates the facade and structure, of a deteriorated and/or uninhabitable building to comply with current building code standards and be consistent with the character of the original structure and/or neighborhood and such investment shall be equal to or greater than 50 percent of the appraised value of the parcel. 
b.  Removes a blighted uninhabitable residential structure or blighted commercial structure and replaces it with a new structure of equal or greater square footage. 
c.  Upgrades a commercial or multifamily structure to comply with an industry recognized environmental certification standard approved by the director. Such investment shall be equal to or greater than 30 percent of the appraised value of the structure. 
(4)  Mixed income development. A portion of a development's units must be reserved for, and made affordable to, households whose incomes are at least below 80 percent of the area median. 
(5)  Mixed use development. A development that includes residential and commercial/retail uses that are intended to increase intensity of land uses, increase diversity of land uses and integrate segregated uses. 
(6)  Adaptive reuse. A process that adapts buildings for new uses while retaining their historic features. 
(7)  Affordable housing set aside. A percentage of the total units shall be affordable to households whose incomes are at least below 80 percent of the area median income. The affordable units shall be distributed proportionally throughout the development and phases (where applicable) and appropriately designed and integrated with market-rate units throughout the development. Thirty percent of affordable units must be delivered in the first phase and the remainder of the units must be delivered proportionally based on years of build-out and phasing. 
(8)  Blighted structure. A structure by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age, or obsolescence; inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; high density of population and overcrowding; existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire and other causes; or any combination of such factors is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency, or crime and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare. 
(9)  Permanent jobs. A job or jobs with no predetermined end date, with a regular work week of 30 hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
(10)  Multifamily and single-family dwellings. These terms shall be defined as set forth in section 13.1.1 of Chapter 13 of Appendix A of the Columbus Code (the UDO). 
(e)  Except as provided herein, any parcel in an urban service district will be taxed at the millage rate set for the entire urban service district by council each year ("the default millage rate"). The following millage rate abatements will apply in each abatement category as provided below: 
(1)  The maximum millage rate for significant impact properties will be seven mills less than the default millage rate for a maximum period of ten years. 
(2)  The maximum millage rate for moderate impact properties will be five mills less than the default millage rate set for a maximum period of ten years. 
(3)  The maximum millage rate for light impact properties will be three mills less that the default millage rate for a maximum period of ten years. 
The assessment of any property at a preferred rate for any year will be contingent on the director of the department of community reinvestment certifying to the tax commissioner that the taxpayer is in compliance with any and all requirements of the developer agreement applicable to the impacted parcel. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 1, 3-26-13) 
Sec. 2-65.2. - Requirements for future ordinances establishing specified Urban Service Districts entitled to millage rate abatement. 
Each urban service district designated for millage rate abatement to encourage economic development in accordance with the guidelines of this article shall be created by a further ordinance specifying its contiguous boundaries and providing the conditions under which such district will come into being and cease to exist. A redevelopment plan for each district so created shall be on file with the department of community reinvestment, and each such ordinance shall provide for a review by council every five years of the effectiveness of that urban service district. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 2, 3-26-13) 
Sec. 2-65.3. - Repeal of certain conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed; provided however, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any existing or future ordinances pertaining to zoning, design review standards, or other land use regulation from being fully applicable to properties contained in designated urban service districts. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § 3, 3-26-13) 
ARTICLE VI. - INTERNAL AUDITOR/COMPLIANCE OFFICER 

Sec. 2-66. - Position created. 
There is hereby created an appointive position within the consolidated government to be known as internal auditor/compliance officer. This position shall not be in the merit system of the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 06-100, § 1, 11-7-06) 
Sec. 2-67. - Appointment procedure. 
The internal auditor/compliance officer shall be appointed and may be removed by the affirmative vote of six members of the Columbus Council. The salary of the internal auditor/compliance officer shall be set forth in the appointing resolution. 
(Ord. No. 06-100, § 1, 11-7-06) 
Sec. 2-68. - Supervision and direction. 
The internal auditor/compliance officer shall be subject to the direction of the mayor, in conjunction with the Columbus Council. Such direction shall be by resolutions, written or oral, which shall include direction to the internal auditor/compliance officer to conduct inquiries and investigations and shall include the purpose and scope of said inquiries or investigations. 
The internal auditor shall notify the mayor, city manager and council in writing within three business days of the initiation of any audit. Before such reports are submitted to the mayor, city manager and Columbus Council, the subject of the audit, including but not limited to, the department head, office, commission, board, authority or elected official involved, or their designee, shall file a written response to the report with the internal auditor/compliance officer within ten business days of receipt of the report. The entire report and the result of such inquiries or investigations shall be submitted concurrently by hard copy to the mayor, city manager and Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 06-100, § 1, 11-7-06; Ord. No. 10-39, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-69. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the internal auditor/compliance officer to: 
(a)  Plan and conduct internal reviews and audits within the consolidated government, to ensure compliance with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and generally accepted accounting principles and auditing standards; 
(b)  Review, monitor and make recommendations concerning accounting procedures and review internal control procedures to ensure adherence to good management practices and protection of government interests; 
(c)  Review records pertaining to monetary, physical and manpower assets to ensure accountability and efficient utilization; 
(d)  Analyze work processes, administrative procedures, work flow, layout and utilization of physical facilities, equipment, and manpower to determine productivity levels, and compliance with established standard operating procedures; 
(e)  Recommend and develop performance standards; and 
(f)  Conduct costs/benefit analyses and recommend procedures to detect waste, fraud, abuse, inefficiency and to insure compliance with ethical standards. 
(g)  Prepare an annual schedule of internal audits to be performed, subject to approval of Columbus Council prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(h)  Direct, plan, conduct and prepare written reports of audit findings to the Columbus Council. 
(i)  Advise Columbus Council as deemed appropriate on financial impact of policy changes and implementation of policies. 
(j)  Direct and participate in special investigations, projects or programs as directed by Columbus Council. 
(k)  Perform such other duties as may be required by resolution of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 06-100, § 1, 11-7-06; Ord. No. 10-39, § 2, 8-24-10) 
Secs. 2-70—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARD OF HONOR FOR DISTINGUISHED CITIZENS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-92, adopted Sept. 30, 1975, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1—7 herein as Art. VII, §§ 2-81—2-87, was at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 2-81. - Established; purpose. 
(a)  A board of honor for distinguished citizens is hereby established for the purpose of honoring citizens through a continuing memorial program in Columbus, Georgia, under which public activities, buildings, bridges and other facilities may be named for citizens who distinguish themselves through service to the city. 
(b)  With respect to the naming of city streets, all proposals to rename an existing street or any segment thereof in honor or memory of any person living or dead, shall be referred to the board of honor for notice, inquiry and deliberation consistent with the manner in which it conducts its other duties pursuant to this article. After inquiry and deliberation, the board shall make a recommendation to the Columbus Council for honorary designation by resolution, official street naming by ordinance, or denial of the request. Provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the naming of new streets pursuant to § 7.8.5 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, city-owned facilities named in memory of a person pursuant to subsection (a) may be reviewed by the Board of Honor or the Columbus Council after the lapse of a 15-year period from the date of facility naming by the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 1, 9-30-75; Ord. No. 11-57, § 1, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Sec. 2-82. - Composition of board; election of members. 
The board shall be composed of seven members selected by the Columbus Council who are former mayors, former councilors, or any former elected official whose district or jurisdiction included Columbus, Georgia. Notwithstanding any other policy, resolution or ordinance of the Columbus Council, members of the board of honor shall be authorized to serve concurrently on any other board of the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 2, 9-30-75; Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 14-21, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-82.1. - Board of honor service on other boards or commissions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any member of the board of honor may also serve as a member of any other board or commission of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia. Former mayors or councilors who are serving as a full-time or part-time employee of the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia may also serve on the board of honor. 
(Ord. No. 12-49, § 1, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 2-83. - Term of members; filling of vacancies; appointment of officers. 
The initial terms of appointment shall be as follows; 
(a)  Two members shall be appointed for a one-year term; 
(b)  Two members shall be appointed for two-year terms; 
(c)  Two members shall be appointed for three-year terms; 
(d)  One member shall be appointed for a four-year term. 
Annually thereafter, a member of the board shall be appointed for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the term. The board shall appoint annually a chairman and such other officers as required by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 3, 9-30-75) 
Sec. 2-84. - Rules of proceedings; compensation of members. 
The board may make their own rules of proceedings for their organization procedures consistent with the ordinances of Columbus and the State of Georgia. The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 4, 9-30-75) 
Sec. 2-85. - Memorialization criteria. 
Memorialization criteria shall be as follows: 
(a)  The board shall develop procedures for considering nominations of deceased citizens that have distinguished themselves by outstanding service to the community; 
(b)  No memorialization motions will be made without the consent of the immediate family of the honoree and without public notice of the motion being considered by the board of honor. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 5, 9-30-75) 
Sec. 2-86. - Consideration, etc., of nominations for memorial designation of public property and activities. 
From time to time, this board shall consider, inquire, deliberate and decide upon all nominations for memorial designation of public property and activities, and will make their recommendation to the council within 30 days after their actions. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 6, 9-30-75) 
Sec. 2-87. - Secretary to board. 
The deputy clerk of council shall serve as secretary to the board of honor. 
(Ord. No. 75-92, § 7, 9-30-75) 
Secs. 2-88—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-51, adopted Apr. 29, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification herein of §§ 1—9 of said ordinance as Art. VIII, §§ 2-91—2-99, is at the discretion of the editor, and catchlines have been supplied where necessary to facilitate reference and indexing. 

Sec. 2-91. - Board created; authority generally; composition. 
There is hereby created a board of commissioners to be known as the "Columbus Convention and Visitors Board of Commissioners" who may be authorized by the Council of Columbus, Georgia to have use of buildings, grounds and equipment that are used or may be used for the promotion of tourism, trade, and conventions in Columbus. The mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the council, persons to fill all vacancies that may occur on said board at any regular meeting of the council after such vacancy occurs. The convention and visitors board of commissioners shall consist of nine persons, all of whom shall be residents of Columbus, Georgia and qualified by law to vote at elections for the mayor and members of the Columbus Council. In addition, the executive director of the commission shall serve on the board during his incumbency and shall be entitled to speak and be heard at meetings, but the executive director shall not be entitled to vote. In addition, the executive assistant to the mayor and the city manager shall serve on the board as ex officio members and shall be entitled to speak and be heard at meetings, but shall not be entitled to vote. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 1, 4-29-80; Ord. No. 96-98, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 04-40, § 2, 6-8-04) 
Sec. 2-92. - Terms of office. 
Except for the members of the first board to serve, the term of office of each member shall be for three years, and members shall continue in office until a successor is named and appointed. The selection for the first members of the board may be held at any regular meeting of council after the effective date of the act authorizing the creation of such board or at any regular meeting thereafter. 
At such meeting the mayor shall appoint, with the consent of council, three members to serve until the first day of January next following and until each member's successor is named and appointed, three to serve until the first day of January thence next following and until each member's successor is named and appointed, three members to serve until the first day of January thence next following and until each member's successor is named and appointed, so that the term of office of only three members will expire each year. As the respective terms of office of each member of the board expire, the mayor shall appoint, with the consent of council, at a regular meeting held in July of each year prior to the expiration of the term of each member, a successor to each member of the board whose term expires in January following thereafter, who shall be selected for a term of three years, so that the term of three members of said board shall end on January 1 of each year and three members shall be selected to succeed to such new term. 
Three commissioners shall represent the hotel/motel industry, three commissioners shall represent the restaurant/retail trade and three commissioners shall serve at large. Such representation of the new nine-member commission may be accomplished by the Columbus Council as current terms expire and in any order desired by the council. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 2, 4-29-80; Ord. No. 91-05, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 95-49, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 04-40, § 3, 6-8-04) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Act No. 1204, Ga. Laws 1980, authorized the creation and abolition, by the council by ordinance, of the Columbus Convention and Visitors Board of Commissioners. Said act was approved by the governor on Mar. 25, 1980. 
Sec. 2-93. - Oath. 
The members shall take the following oath before entering into the discharge of their duties: 
"I do solemnly swear that I am duly qualified to serve as a member of the Columbus Convention and Visitors Board of Commissioners; that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge all of the duties and obligations devolving upon me as a member of said Board without fear, favor and affection, and as will subserve the best interests of Columbus, Georgia, so help me God." 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 3, 4-29-80) 
Sec. 2-94. - Quorum; authority to prescribe rules and regulations; records and reports. 
A majority of the Columbus Convention and Visitors Board of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall have the power and authority to keep rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs, and shall keep a record of all acts and doings of said board in books to be purchased and kept for that purpose, which books shall be subject to examination at any time by persons authorized to do so by the mayor and Council of Columbus. The board shall make reports to the mayor and council on the operation and condition of the convention and visitors commission in accordance with any resolution that may be passed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 4, 4-29-80) 
Sec. 2-95. - Selection of officers; authority re employees, salary and compensation. 
The board shall have the power to annually select a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary/treasurer for the board, and employ an executive director as may be necessary in the operation of the commission's activities, who in turn shall be delegated the authority and responsibility necessary to properly administer the business of the commission and its agencies created herein or at a later date, within policies set by the board and subject to its review. The executive director shall have full charge of the offices and also all of the employees, and he shall have authority to hire and terminate employees, subject to policies and procedures established by the board. The board shall have the authority to establish salaries and compensation which must be approved by the Council of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 5, 4-29-80; Ord. No. 87-167, 12-1-87) 
Sec. 2-96. - Purchases; contracts. 
The board may purchase from time to time, such material, machinery, apparatus and appliances as may be needed for the purposes hereafter set forth. All contracts made by the board in excess of $5,000.00 shall be in writing and one copy of each contract shall be deposited with the clerk of council for the benefit of the mayor and Council of Columbus. All purchases and contracts shall conform to the limits of the board's budget. The board shall have the authority to require from any person, firm or corporation with whom they contract satisfactory secretary for the faithful performance of the contract according to its terms. No member shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract relating to such operation without full disclosure to the board. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 6, 4-29-80) 
Sec. 2-97. - Annual budget. 
The exclusive source of income for the annual budget of the board shall be revenue received from the hotel-motel tax, and all of the revenue derived from said tax shall be earmarked for the exclusive use of the board; but the board shall nevertheless submit its annual budget to the mayor and council for approval, and the board shall return to the treasury of Columbus, Georgia, any excess revenue derived from the tax or from income generated by the board's activities. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 7, 4-29-80; Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Sec. 2-98. - Compensation, refund of expenses; inspection of property and books by council. 
The members of said board shall not receive any compensation for their services, but within the limits of the board's budget, shall be paid and refunded all reasonable expense which they may incur in the performance of their duties. The mayor and Council of Columbus, Georgia shall be authorized, by and through a committee of their own number, or by any person they may select, to inspect at their pleasure, the state and condition of the board of commissioners and the property thereto belonging, and also all books and accounts pertaining to the affairs of the commission and the board shall give and furnish them any reasonable facility and assistance in making such inspections. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 8, 4-29-80) 
Sec. 2-99. - Board deemed subordinate government branch; removal of members. 
The board of commissioners shall be considered a subordinate branch of Columbus, Georgia, a consolidated city-county government, and shall conform in their actings and doings to all ordinances and resolutions that may be passed by the mayor and council of said government. The mayor and Council of Columbus, Georgia, may at any time remove any member which they may have elected to the board, if it shall satisfactorily appear, after reasonable notice to the parties, and hearing of the causes of complaint and answers thereto, if any should be offered, that the member whose removal is sought has been guilty of maladministration or neglect of the duties of this office, that the member's removal will be right and proper, and seven members of the Council of Columbus shall concur in such removal. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 9, 4-29-80) 
Sec. 2-100. - Replacement. 
Wherever the words "executive director" appear in this article, they shall be replaced by the words "president and CEO." Wherever the words "chairman" or "vice-chairman" appear in this article, they shall be replaced by the words "chair" or "vice-chair." 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § 1, 6-8-04) 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 83-18, enacted March 22, 1983, repealed Ord. No. 80-88, which recreated the Columbus Community Relations Commission, and § 2 of said Ord. No. 83-18 abolished the commission. Inasmuch as Art. IX, §§ 2-101—2-103, derived from §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 80-88, said article has been deleted and is reserved for future use. Section 3 of Ord. No. 83-18 authorized the mayor to appoint members of an ad hoc commission, if and when a future need for same arises. 

Secs. 2-101—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - IRON WORKS CONVENTION AND TRADE CENTER AUTHORITY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 83-79, adopted Sept. 27, 1983, did not specifically amend this Code; however, at the request of the city, the substantive provisions of said ordinance are included herein. Designation of §§ 1—6 of said ordinance as Art. X of Ch. 2 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-121. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created, as a subordinate branch of the consolidated government, a Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center Authority to supervise the manager and employees and the buildings and grounds and operations of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center. Title to the real and personal property of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center shall remain with the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia, and the Council of Columbus, Georgia, may pass any ordinances which it deems necessary to regulate the duties and activities and policies of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 1, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-122. - Memberships; terms, compensation, qualifications, oath. 
The authority shall consist of five members nominated by the mayor of Columbus, Georgia and appointed by the council, the members of which will serve for terms of three years, beginning with staggered term of one year for one of the original members, of two years for two of the original members, and of three years for two more of the original members. Members shall be eligible to succeed themselves once and they shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the Columbus Council. Each member shall serve until his successor is duly qualified, and former members who have served two successive terms shall be eligible for re-appointment to the authority after the expiration of a full three-year period during which such former members do not serve as members of the authority. Each member shall be a qualified voter in Columbus, Georgia; and, before assuming the duties of office, each member shall take the oath prescribed for board members serving the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 2, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-123. - Operational procedures. 
A majority of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of the entire membership shall be necessary to take any action. The authority shall hold regular meetings under such rules and at such times and places as it deems appropriate, and the authority shall keep a written record of its meetings and any other of its transactions. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 3, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-124. - Powers and duties. 
The authority shall maintain the physical plant and conduct the operations of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center so as to best realize its potential for commercial or cultural or civic or convention activities. The authority shall control the management and employees of the center in the manner hereinafter prescribed. Within the budgetary limitations prescribed by the Columbus Council, the authority shall have the power to enter into contracts for the purpose of improving or repairing the facilities of the center, the power to enter into contracts for the usage of the center, and the power to obtain goods or services connected with the upkeep or use of the center. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 4, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-125. - Manager and employees. 
Management of the daily operations of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center shall be vested in the manager who will be appointed by the authority and who shall serve at the pleasure of the authority. The manager, with the approval of the authority and within the budget approved by the Columbus Council, shall hire and supervise whatever supervisors and employees are necessary for conducting the affairs of the center; such supervisors and employees shall be in the merit system of the consolidated government and shall be governed by the same salaries and benefits and rights which accrue to merit system employees of the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 5, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-126. - Budget. 
In each fiscal year the authority shall submit a budget to the mayor of Columbus, who shall forward this budget to the Columbus Council along with the separate budget which the mayor submits for the consolidated government. The council shall act on the separate budget submitted by the authority in the same manner that it acts upon the general budget of the consolidated government. The budget to cover the activities of the Columbus Iron Works Convention and Trade Center shall be designed to maximize the revenue producing potential of the center, but necessary supplemental funds from the general fund shall be provided in order to prevent the impairment of any of the functions of the center; any excess of revenue over expenses which the operation of the center generates will be placed in the general fund of the consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 83-79, § 6, 9-27-83) 
Secs. 2-127—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - KEEP COLUMBUS BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 86-138, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 23, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of this ordinance as a new Art XI, §§ 2-131—2-134, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Litter, § 13-151 et seq. 

Sec. 2-131. - Established; organization; operation procedures. 
There is established, as a subordinate branch of the consolidated government, a Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission, to be composed of 25 members. A majority of the total membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum and such a majority vote shall be necessary for any commission action. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the commission shall be elected by a majority vote of appointed commissioners. The chairperson shall preside at commission meetings and vote only in the event of a tie or only in the event that a vote of the chairperson would result in the majority necessary for any commission action. One member of the commission shall be appointed by the Columbus Council from each Columbus Council district and the remaining 17 members shall be appointed by the Columbus Council from nominations made by the commission chairperson or from any other nominations made from the floor of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 86-138, § 1, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 88-100, § 1, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 90-83, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 93-41, 6-8-93) 
Sec. 2-132. - Standing committees—Establi- shed; membership; duties. 
The commission shall establish permanent standing committees to carry out the duties of the commission, each to be chaired by a member of the commission as designated by the commission. Members of each committee will be appointed by the respective chairmen. 
(Ord. No. 86-138, § 2, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 88-100, § 2, 10-18-88) 
Sec. 2-133. - Same—Goal. 
All committees of the commission shall coordinate activities so as to achieve in Columbus, Georgia, the goal of a sustained reduction in litter as a first step towards improving the environment. This is also the goal of Keep America Beautiful, Inc., an organization with which the Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission shall work in conjunction. 
(Ord. No. 86-138, § 3, 12-23-86) 
Sec. 2-134. - Executive director; powers. 
The commission shall be authorized to employ, with the approval of the Columbus Council, a full-time salaried executive director, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission and whose authority and responsibility and terms or conditions of employment will be defined by the commission. The executive director shall be delegated the authority and responsibility necessary to properly administer the business of the commission, within policies set by the commission and subject to its review. The executive director shall have full charge of the offices and also all of the employees of the commission, and shall have authority to hire and terminate employees, subject to policies and procedures established by the commission and to the limitations of the commission's budget. The executive director shall be a resident and a qualified registered voter of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 86-138, § 4, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 88-100, § 3, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 99-27, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 2-135. - Authority of commission generally; meetings; written record. 
The commission shall have the authority to adopt and amend bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its goals and objectives. The commission shall hold regular meetings under such rules and regulations and at such times and places as it deems appropriate, and the commission shall keep a written record of its meetings and any other of its transactions, which shall be filed with the clerk of council. The Council of Columbus, Georgia, may pass any ordinance or resolution which it deems necessary to regulate or define the activities of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 1-19-88) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-5, adopted Jan. 19, 1988, amended Art. XI by adding provisions thereto; codification of such provisions as §§ 2-135—2-138 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-136. - Duties. 
The duties of the commission shall include, but shall not be limited to, the promotion of the public interest in the general improvement of the environment of Columbus; and the study, investigation, development and implementation of plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety, cleanliness, and beautification of Columbus; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, change or limit the powers and duties of any other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 2, 1-19-88) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-135. 
Sec. 2-137. - Terms; compensation; expenses; resignation; removal of members. 
Members of the commission shall serve for terms of two years from the date of appointment by the Columbus Council and an additional period if necessary so that members' terms expire on July 1 of the year in which any two-year term ends. The additional 13 members of the commission shall serve for terms of two years beginning on July 1, 1993. All members of the commission shall be eligible to succeed themselves for one additional two-year term. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the Columbus Council, but within the limits of the commission's budget, shall be paid and refunded all reasonable expenses which they may incur in the performance of their duties. Upon the resignation or removal of any member of the commission, the Columbus Council shall appoint a successor upon any other nomination made by a member of the council or from the floor of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 3, 1-19-88; Ord. No. 88-100, § 4, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 93-41, 6-8-93) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-135. 
Sec. 2-138. - Use of funds; budget. 
(a)  Receiving and disbursing funds. The commission shall have the authority to receive and disburse funds in accordance with its goals and objectives. The commission shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency to the extent required for its proper operation. 
(b)  Annual budget; inspection of books; audit report. In each fiscal year, the commission shall submit its annual budget to the mayor and council for approval. The internal auditor for Columbus shall annually inspect the books and accounts of the commission and shall submit an audit report to the Columbus Council. 
(c)  Donation, appropriations of money, etc. The commission shall have the authority to solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, and personal property, in addition to any appropriations contained in the annual budget of the consolidated government, for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its goals and objectives. 
(d)  No authority to bind consolidated government by contract, etc. The commission shall not have the power or authority to bind the consolidated government by any contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness or otherwise, and no contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness incurred by the commission shall ever be a claim or charge against the consolidated government. 
(e)  Council may terminate commission projects, etc. Any project or undertaking begun by the commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the council that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 4, 1-19-88) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-135. 
Sec. 2-139. - Qualifications of members; oath of office. 
Members of the Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission shall be residents and qualified registered voters of Columbus, Georgia. Appointees to the Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission, before assuming the duties of their office, shall take the following oath before the mayor of Columbus, Georgia: 
"I ___________(name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am a resident and qualified registered voter of Columbus, Georgia, and that I will faithfully and impartially demean myself as a member of the Keep Columbus Beautiful Commission during my continuance in office; that I will discharge my duties to the best of my ability; that I will do so agreeably with the laws of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and the Charter of Columbus, Georgia, so help me God." 
(Ord. No. 88-112, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 96-72, 8-6-96) 
Secs. 2-140—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-101, § 1, adopted October 23, 2001, repealed Ch. 2, Art. XII in its entirety. Former Art. XII, §§ 2-151—2-174, pertained to drug-free workplace policy and derived from Ord. No. 93-55, adopted July 6, 1993, and Ord. No. 94-5, adopted January 11, 1994. 
§ 2 of Ord. No. 01-101 reads as follows: 
"Human Resources Policy Number 220-506 Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy and revised Human Resources Policies Numbered 220-501 Work Rules ; 220-502 Disciplinary Action and 22-504 Fair Treatment Policy , dated November 1, 2001 and attached to this ordinance are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. The official copies of said policies shall be maintained in the Office of the City Manager." 

Secs. 2-151—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LAND BANK AUTHORITY[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-12, adopted Feb. 11, 1992, amended the Code by adding an article thereto; inclusion of §§ 1—8 of the ordinance as Art. XIII, §§ 2-181—2-188, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-181. - Need for and purpose of authority. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a land bank authority (as more fully described and defined in the Land Bank Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. 48-4-60 et seq., Georgia Laws 1990 p. 1875) to function in Columbus, Georgia, for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare by returning land which is in a nonrevenue-generating, nontax-producing status to an effective utilization status in order to provide housing, new industry, and jobs for the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 2-182. - Authority activated. 
(a)  There is hereby established in Columbus, Georgia, the public body corporate and politic known as the "Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia." 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-100 and 48-4-104 and with approval by the Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia, said Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia shall continue in existence under O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 et. seq. In addition to any powers bestowed by other state law or local ordinance, the rules of procedure and all powers bestowed upon a land bank by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 through O.C.G.A. § 48-4-112 are hereby adopted, incorporated by reference, and shall apply to the Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 2, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 2-183. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Authority means the land bank authority established pursuant to this article. 
City means the [City of] Columbus, Georgia. 
Property means the real property, including any improvements thereon. 
Tax-delinquent property means any property on which the taxes levied and assessed by the city or Muscogee County tax commissioner remain in whole or in part unpaid on the date due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 3, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 2-184. - Powers and purpose. 
(a)  The authority shall be a public body corporate and politic with the power to sue and be sued and to accept and issue deeds in its name and to institute quia timet actions and shall have any other powers necessary and incidental to carry out the powers granted by this article. 
(b)  The authority shall be established to acquire the tax delinquent properties of the parties in order to foster the public purpose of returning land which is in a nonrevenue-generating, nontax-producing status to an effective utilization status in order to provide housing, new industry, and jobs for the citizens of the county. The authority shall have the powers provided in this article, O.C.G.A. 48-4-60 et seq., and those necessary and incidental to the exercise of such powers. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 4, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 2-185. - Board to govern authority; members; meetings; organization; staff. 
(a)  Effective September 1, 2012, the Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia shall be governed by a board of seven members, four of which shall be appointed by the Columbus Council and three additional members which shall be nominated and approved by the Land Bank Authority and confirmed by Columbus Council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-104. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the respective appointing authority for a term of four years and shall serve without compensation. The authority may reimburse a board member for expenses actually incurred in the performance of the duties on behalf of the authority. 
(b)  The authority shall meet in regular session according to a schedule adopted by the authority and also shall meet in special session as convened by the chairperson or upon written notice signed by a majority of the authority members. Four members of the authority shall constitute a quorum and all actions of the authority must be approved by the affirmative vote of majority of the members of the authority present and voting, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-104(i); provided however, that no action of the authority shall be authorized on the following matters unless approved by a majority of the entire authority membership: 
(1)  Adoption of bylaws and other rules and regulations for conduct of the Authority's business; 
(2)  Hiring or firing of any employee or contractor of the authority; 
(3)  Incurring of debt; 
(4)  Adoption or amendment of the annual budget; and 
(5)  Sale, lease, encumbrance, or alienation of real property, improvements, or personal property with a value of more than $50,000. 
(c)  The Land Bank Authority of Columbus, Georgia shall have all powers necessary or appropriate to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section and O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 et seq. and particularly, the powers enumerated at O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-106, 108, 109, 110, 111 and 112. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 5, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 10-58, § 1, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 12-40, § 2, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 2-186. - Administration of properties. 
(a)  The authority shall hold, in its own name, for the benefit of the city, all properties conveyed to it by the city, all tax delinquent properties acquired by it pursuant to this article, and all properties otherwise acquired. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the authority to administer the properties acquired by it, as follows: 
(1)  All property acquired by the authority shall be inventoried and appraised and the inventory shall be maintained; 
(2)  The authority shall organize and classify the property on the basis of suitability; 
(3)  The authority shall maintain all property held by it with applicable laws and codes; and 
(4)  The authority shall have the power to manage, maintain, protect, rent, lease, repair, insure, alter, sell, trade, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any property on terms and conditions determined in the sole discretion of the authority. 
The authority may assemble tracts or parcels of property for public parks or other public purposes, and to that end may exchange parcels and otherwise effectuate the purposes determined by agreement with any party. 
(c)  The acquisition and disposal of property by the authority shall not be governed or controlled by any regulations or laws of the city unless specifically provided. 
(d)  No property located within the city may be sold, traded, exchanged, or otherwise disposed of by the authority, unless the transaction is approved by the authority members. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 6, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 2-187. - Acquisition and disposal of property. 
(a)  If the city obtains a judgment against a tax delinquent property for the taxes and, to satisfy the judgment, the property is ordered sold at a tax sale and if no person bids an amount equal to the full amount of all tax bills, interest, and costs owing on the property at the sale, the authority shall have the option at any time after the tax sale to cause the Muscogee County Tax Commissioner to make a deed of the property to the authority. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of code Section 48-4-45, the authority shall have the right to foreclose the right to redeem property at any time after the expiration of the 12-month redemption period has expired pursuant to code Section 48-4-65. 
(c)  When a property is acquired by the authority, the authority shall have the power to extinguish all county and city taxes and other liens of the city, other than school district taxes, at the time it sells or otherwise disposes of property. In determining whether or not to extinguish taxes and liens, the authority shall consider the public benefit to be gained by the forgiveness with primary consideration given to purchasers who intend to build or rehabilitate low-income housing. 
(d)  At the time that the authority sells or otherwise disposes of property as part of its land bank program, the proceeds from sale shall be used to first satisfy all costs and expenses incurred by the authority in selling or disposing of the property and then applied to satisfy outstanding school district taxes and then satisfy any outstanding taxes and costs of the city or Muscogee County Tax Commissioner. Any proceeds remaining after paying all costs, expenses, taxes, and other liens shall be used by the authority to pay any additional administration expenses. Conveyance of a property to the city shall not constitute disposal. 
(e)  The authority shall have full discretion in determining the sales price of the property. The authority shall provide for a distribution of property that neighborhood nonprofit entities obtaining the land for low-income housing and, secondarily, other entities intending to produce low-income or moderate-income housing. 
(f)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-110, the land bank authority of Columbus, Georgia shall receive 75 percent of the real property taxes collected on real property, exclusive of any state or school district ad valorem tax, conveyed by the land bank authority pursuant to the laws of Georgia. Such allocation of property tax revenue shall commence with the first taxable year following the date of conveyance by the land bank authority and shall continue for a period of five years. Such funds shall be remitted to the land bank authority in accordance with the administrative procedures established by the Muscogee County Tax Commissioner. 
(g)  At the time that the land bank authority sells or otherwise disposes of property as part of its land bank authority program, the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be allocated as determined by the land bank authority among the following priorities: 
(1)  Furtherance of land bank authority operations; 
(2)  Recovery of land bank authority expenses; and 
(3)  Remitter to the Muscogee County tax commissioner for distribution to the appropriate taxing entity in proportion to and to the extent of their respective tax bills and costs. 
Any excess proceeds shall be distributed pursuant to any applicable intergovernmental contract or land bank authority rules, regulations, or bylaws in accordance with the public policy stated in this article or O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 et seq. 
(h)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 et seq., the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-100 et seq. shall control. 
(i)  All meeting of the land bank authority shall be open to the public, except as provided by Chapter 14 of Title 50, and a written record shall be maintained at all meetings. 
(j)  Upon any dissolution of the land bank authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-111, all real property, personal property, and other assets of the land bank authority shall become the assets of the Consolidated Government of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 3, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 2-188. - Foreclosure of right of redemption to property conveyed to authority. 
The authority may foreclose the right of redemption to the property conveyed to the authority in the following manner: 
(1)  The record title to the property shall be examined and a certificate of title shall be prepared for the benefit of the authority; 
(2)  The authority shall serve the prior owner whose interest was foreclosed upon and all persons having record title or interest in or lien upon the property with a notice of foreclosure of this right to redeem in conformance with code Section 48-4-46; 
(3)  In the event persons entitled to service are located outside the county, they may be served by certified mail; or 
(4)  In the event the sheriff is unable to perfect service or certified mail attempts are returned unclaimed, the authority shall conduct a search for the person with an interest in the property conveyed to the authority, which search must, at a minimum, have included the following: 
a.  An examination of the addresses given on the face of the instrument vesting interest or the addresses given to the clerk of the superior court by the transfer tax declaration form. The clerk of the superior court and the tax assessor of the county are required to share information contained in the transfer tax declaration form with one another in a timely manner; 
b.  A search of the current telephone directory for the city in which the property is located; 
c.  A letter of inquiry to the person who sold the property to the defendant in a tax sale at the address shown in the transfer tax declaration form or in the telephone directory; 
d.  A letter of inquiry to the attorney handling the closing prior to the tax sale if provided on the deed forms; 
e.  A sign being no less than four feet by six feet shall be erected on the property and maintained by the authority for a minimum of 30 days reading as follows: 
"This property has been conveyed to the Columbus Land Bank Authority by virtue of a sale for unpaid taxes, persons with information regarding the prior owner of the property are requested to call_______." 
f.  If the authority has made the search as required by this paragraph and been unable to locate these persons required to be served under paragraph (2) of this Code section or, having located additional addresses of those persons through such search, attempted without success or serve those persons in either manner provided by paragraph (2) or (3) of this Code section, the authority shall make a written summary of the attempts made to serve the notice, in recordable form, and may authorize the foreclosure of the redemption rights of record. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 8, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 2-189. - In rem tax foreclosures. 
(a)  Scope. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq., and is in addition to and an alternative to nonjudicial tax foreclosure or any other current power of the land bank authority of Columbus, Georgia, the county tax commissioner or the county sheriff. In addition to any other powers bestowed by Georgia law upon Columbus, Georgia or the land bank authority of Columbus, Georgia, the land bank authority may make written request to the county tax commissioner or the county sheriff to initiate in rem tax foreclosures pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. A copy of the request shall be forwarded to the clerk of council as notification of such action to the Columbus Council. 
(b)  Conflict with state law. Should any portion of this section conflict with state law, the applicable state law will control. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Interested party means: 
a.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
b.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; or 
c.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records maintained by the tax commissioner, clerk, or other records maintained in the county courthouse. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected. 
(2)  Redemption amount means the full amount of the delinquent ad valorem taxes, accrued interest at the specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, penalties as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44, and costs incurred by the county in collecting such taxes as allocated in its discretion, including without limitation the cost of title examination, attorney's fees, and publication of notice. 
(3)  Tax commissioner means the collective office of the Muscogee County Tax Commissioner. 
(4)  Court means the Superior Court of Muscogee County, Georgia. 
(5)  Clerk means the Clerk of the Superior Court of Muscogee County, Georgia. 
(6)  Sheriff means the Muscogee County Sheriff. 
(d)  The petition. 
(1)  After an ad valorem tax lien based upon an approved digest has been delinquent for 12 months, the land bank authority of Columbus, Georgia may select one or more properties for in rem foreclosure under this Code section. The land bank authority may then make written request to the tax commissioner or the county sheriff to initiate in rem tax foreclosures pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. The county tax commissioner or the county sheriff may commence tax foreclosure in accordance with this section and O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. 
(2)  The county tax commissioner or the county sheriff may commence tax foreclosure by filing a petition in the county superior court. Said petition must include: 
a.  The county tax commissioner or the county sheriff as the petitioner; 
b.  The property address; 
c.  A legal description of the property; 
d.  The tax identification number of the property; 
e.  The calendar year(s) for which the taxes are delinquent; 
f.  The principal amount of the delinquent taxes together with interest and penalties; and 
g.  The names and addresses of parties to whom copies of the petition are to be sent in accordance with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The petitioners shall mail copies of the petition by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the petition shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any, and shall be posted on the property. 
(4)  Simultaneously with the filing of the petition, the petitioner shall file a lis pendens notice at the office of the clerk of the county superior court. 
(5)  Within 30 days of the filing of the petition, a notice shall be published on two separate dates in the official organ of the county in which the property is located. Said notice shall specify: 
a.  The county tax commissioner or county sheriff as petitioner and as the entity responsible for collecting the delinquent taxes; 
b.  The property address; 
c.  A description of the property; 
d.  The tax identification number and/or property and parcel number of the property; 
e.  The applicable period of tax delinquency; 
f.  The principal amount of the delinquent taxes together with interest and penalties; 
g.  The date and place of the filing of the petition. 
(e)  The judicial hearing. 
(1)  The petitioner shall request a judicial hearing not earlier than 30 days after the filing of the petition. At such hearing any interested party has the right to be heard and to contest the delinquency of the taxes or the adequacy of the proceedings. If the court determines that the information set forth in the petition is accurate, the court may render its judgment and issue an order finding and ordering as follows: 
a.  The taxes are delinquent; 
b.  Proper notice has been given to all interested parties; 
c.  The property as described in the petition shall be sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.; 
d.  The order of the superior court shall provide that the property shall be sold free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances other than: 
1.  Rights of redemption provided under federal law; 
2.  Tax liens in favor of Georgia governmental entities other than petitioners which are superior to the ad valorem taxes identified in the petition by virtue of O.C.G.A. § 48-2-56; 
3.  Easements and rights-of-way held by parties described in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-77(1)(c); and 
4.  The holders of the benefits or burdens of any real covenants filed of record as of the date of filing of the petition. 
5.  The sale shall become final and binding 60 days after the date thereof in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-81. 
(2)  If, upon production of evidence, the court determines that any interested party died within the six-month period of time immediately preceding the filing of the petition, the court may postpone the hearing for a period of up to six months, to allow the administrator or executor adequate time to close the estate. 
(f)  The sale. 
(1)  At any time prior to sale, any interested party may redeem the property by payment of the redemption amount to the petitioners, whereupon the petitioners shall dismiss the proceedings. 
(2)  Following the hearing and order of the court in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-79, a sale of the property shall be advertised and conducted on the date, time, place and manner which are required by law of sheriff's sales. Such sale shall not occur earlier than 45 days following the date of the order. 
(3)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, the minimum bid price shall be the redemption amount. In the absence of a higher bid, the petitioners may continue the sale to a specific advertised time on the same sale date or may resubmit advertisement to sell the following month. The Columbus Council may direct the land bank authority of Columbus, Georgia or the city manager to bid in an amount equal to the minimum bid price and thereby become the purchaser on behalf of the county. 
(4)  From and after the moment of the sale and tender of the successful bid price, the sale shall be final and binding, subject only to the right of the owner of the property to redeem the property upon payment into the court of the full amount of the minimum bid price. Such right of redemption of the owner shall exist for a period of 60 days from and after the date of the sale and shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Redemption by an owner shall result in a dismissal of the proceedings, and the petitioner shall refund to the purchaser the full amount paid by the purchaser at the sale; 
b.  For purpose of redemption, "owner" shall mean the owner of record of fee simple interest in the property as of the date of filing of the petition, together with such owner's successors in interest by death or operation of law. This right of redemption shall not otherwise be transferable; and 
c.  This right of redemption shall automatically terminate and expire upon failure to redeem within the 60-day period after the sale. 
(5)  If the property is not redeemed, then within 90 days after the sale, the county tax commissioner or the county sheriff shall cause to be executed and delivered to the purchaser a tax deed, together with a real estate transfer tax form. 
(6)  Within 90 days after the sale, the petitioners shall file a report of the sale with the superior court, stating whether a sale took place, the sale price, and the identity of the purchase. 
(7)  If the sale price exceeds the minimum bid amount, the petitioners shall deposit the surplus into the registry of the superior court. Such surplus shall be distributed by the superior court to the interested parties, including the owner, as their interests appear and in the priority in which their interests exist. 
(g)  Funds may be allocated in the discretion of the Columbus Council to the land bank authority budget to defray expenses of the land bank authority in carrying out the purposes of this chapter. When the land bank authority acquires property through in rem foreclosure, the land bank authority shall pay costs of in rem foreclosure actions filed by petitioner, including attorney's fees, title examinations, surveys or any other costs related to such legal proceedings. The land bank authority may receive grants and donations of funds or property as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-6, § 1, 1-31-12) 
Sec. 2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 94-56, adopted August 2, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as Ch. 2, Art. XIV, §§ 2-191—2-195 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-191. - Department redesignated and recreated. 
The human resources division of the department of administration is redesignated and recreated as the department of human resources which will be headed by a director of human resources to be appointed and removed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 8-2-94) 
Sec. 2-192. - Positions budgeted to continue to exist. 
All positions budgeted in the human resources division by the 1994-95 Budget Ordinance will continue to exist in the department of human resources, and all persons holding such positions shall continue to carry out their duties under the director of human resources: the director of human resources is the same position with the same responsibilities as the human resources division manager (also known as the personnel officer) with only the title of the position redesignated; the other positions within the human resources division that are placed in the human resources department are also the same positions as those that existed prior to the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-56, § 2, 8-2-94) 
Cross reference— Personnel regulations, Ch. 16B. 
Sec. 2-193. - Duties and responsibilities of director of human resources. 
Wherever duties and responsibilities are assigned by personnel regulations (Chapter 16B of the Columbus Code) to the department of administration or to the personnel division or to the director of administration or to the personnel officer, said duties and responsibilities shall be assumed and performed by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 94-56, § 3, 8-2-94) 
Cross reference— Personnel regulations, Ch. 16B. 
Sec. 2-194. - Definition of terms. 
Wherever the terms "personnel division" or "personnel officer" appear in resolutions or ordinances enacted by the Columbus Council, said terms shall be construed to mean "department of human resources" or "director of human resources," respectively. 
(Ord. No. 94-56, § 4, 8-2-94) 
Sec. 2-195. - Responsibilities for personnel rules and regulations; classification and pay plan. 
The responsibilities for personnel rules and regulations and for a classification and pay plan contained in Columbus Charter Section 8-303 and Section 8-304 are assigned to the department of human resources, and the management/compensation analyst currently performing said functions is assigned to the department of human resources to work under the direction of the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 94-56, § 5, 8-2-94) 
Secs. 2-196—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-16, adopted Feb. 15, 2000, repealed Art. XV of Ch. 2 in its entirety. Former Art. XV, §§ 2-201—2-207, pertained to the arts authority and derived from Ord. No. 95-72, §§ 1—7, adopted July 25, 1995. 

Secs. 2-201—2-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-118, adopted Nov. 28, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 of said ordinance as §§ 2-215 and 2-216 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-215. - Supervision; department divisions and responsibilities. 
The department of finance shall be placed under the supervision of the finance director, who shall be accountable to the city manager for all financial management operations. The department shall include the accounting division, revenue division, financial planning division and purchasing division, each division having responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  Accounting division. The accounting division shall be responsible for maintaining a general accounting system for the consolidated government, including budgeting control records, cost accounting records and procedures, preauditing and postauditing of all claims on all funds, and management of records of fixed assets; establishing procedures for making all disbursements including payments to vendors as well as paying compensation owed to employees and retirees of the government; and preparing all periodic financial reports. The division shall perform such other functions as required by the finance director. 
(2)  Revenue division. The revenue division shall be responsible for collecting and receiving all revenues, income and moneys due the consolidated government except as otherwise provided by state law or by Section 8-102 of the Charter; investment and custody of all funds of the consolidated government; and maintaining all banking relationships of the government. The division shall perform such other functions as required by the finance director. 
(3)  Financial planning division. The financial planning division shall be responsible for budget preparation and control, budget execution, management studies, and management reporting; analysis of financial condition; preparation of all materials required in conjunction with the issuance of debt and administering outstanding debt obligations of the consolidated government; and strategic financial planning. The division shall perform such other functions as required by the finance director. 
(4)  Purchasing division. The purchasing division shall be responsible for administering a system of procurement for the consolidated government, the procedure of which shall be prescribed by administrative rule as may be best suited to obtain the greatest economic value and savings to the consolidated government in the procurement of all necessary and appropriate supplies, equipment and services. The division shall perform such other functions as required by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 95-118, § 1, 11-28-95) 
Sec. 2-216. - Implementation of organization structure. 
By the adoption of this article, the city council of the city hereby expressly authorizes the city manager, finance director, and such other officials as may be appropriate to proceed with the implementation of this organization structure and with the reclassification of current authorized positions as attached to [Ordinance No. 95-118 to] complete the implementation. 
(Ord. No. 95-118, § 2, 11-28-95) 
Sec. 2-217. - Checking or interest-bearing accounts with city funds; prior approval required. 
(a)  Employees, appointed officials, and members of boards and commissions of the consolidated government are hereby prohibited from opening checking accounts or interest-bearing accounts with city funds at any financial institution without prior written approval of the city manager and finance director. A copy of such written approval shall be immediately forwarded to the internal auditor by the finance director. This section shall not apply to employees acting at the direction of elected officials or constitutional officers empowered by state law to open such accounts. 
(b)  Any such accounts shall utilize a federal identification number and signature authority approved by the city manager and finance director. 
(Ord. No. 11-35, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Secs. 2-218—2-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CULTURAL LIAISON ENCOUNTERS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-7, adopted Jan. 23, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—3 of said ordinance as §§ 2-225—2-227 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-225. - Established; purposes and functions. 
A commission on international relations and cultural liaison encounters (to be commonly known as CIRCLE) is established and shall have the following purposes and functions: 
(1)  Embrace and address the international concerns, interests and relationships of the Columbus Consolidated Government and advise the Columbus Consolidated Government concerning its international concerns, interests and relationships. 
(2)  Encourage, foster, nurture, support and advance the sister city relationship between Columbus and Kiryu, Japan, and other sister city relationships. 
(3)  Encourage, foster, nurture, support and advance other international relationships and exchanges, including sister city relationships. 
(4)  Promote intercultural and international goodwill and understanding through arranging programs and activities effecting social, cultural, educational or artistic, business or governmental contacts and exchanges among people of various cultures and nationalities and between the people of Columbus and people of other countries. 
(5)  Serve as a link connecting the various groups and organizations in Columbus which represent the cultures of other nations or political subdivisions thereof. 
(6)  Assist with arrangements for and accommodation of visits to Columbus by guests from other countries and of visits by Columbus citizens to other countries. 
(7)  Raise and receive money, and accept any gift or donation to the CIRCLE and administer the same, subject to approval or satisfaction of the Columbus Council. 
(8)  Make and file with the clerk of council an annual report, no later than February 1 of each year, covering CIRCLE activities of the preceding calendar year, including all transactions involving the receipt of disbursement of funds. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 2-226. - Composition—Terms; appointments; vacancies. 
The commission shall be composed of 12 members, who shall serve four-year terms. Eight of the commission members shall be appointed by the Columbus Council, and four shall be appointed by the mayor. Consistent with section 2-1 of this Code, commission members may serve two full consecutive four-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 2, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 98-64, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 09-37, § 1, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 2-227. - Same—Criteria. 
At least half of the commission members must be United States citizens and registered Columbus voters, but because of the commission's international interests and concerns, up to half of the commission's members need not meet this criteria. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 3, 1-23-96) 
Secs. 2-228—2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PUBLIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-231. - Introduction. 
A close relationship between public safety personnel and the community is an essential part of a responsive and responsible consolidated government; 
The benefits of such a relationship are immeasurable for the public safety departments, citizens, the business community, visitors and government officials; 
As a means of enhancing public safety-community relations, communications and community confidence, the mayor of Columbus, Georgia has proposed that a public safety advisory commission be created; and 
The Columbus Council believes that the creation of a public safety advisory commission is a desirable step in ensuring valuable input from citizens and information exchange concerning the provision of public safety services in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-232. - Establishment of commission. 
There is hereby established for Columbus, Georgia a citizens advisory commission to be known as the "Public Safety Advisory Commission." 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-233. - Mission. 
The mission of the public safety advisory commission is to recommend resources, public safety practices and policies, and citizens' responsibilities needed to achieve a safe community to the mayor, Columbus Council, and our public safety departments. 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-234. - Duties. 
(a)  The commission shall strive to create a climate of mutual respect and partnership between the community and public safety departments which helps achieve safety, order and justice for all citizens of Columbus. 
(b)  The commission shall attempt to increase communication between public safety departments and the community, leading to a greater understanding of law enforcement operations in Columbus. 
(c)  The commission shall identify public safety policy and resource issues related to law enforcement operations and methods of alternative policing. 
(d)  The commission shall strive to decrease misunderstandings regarding the application of adopted public safety policies and procedures. 
(e)  The commission shall provide recommendations and input related to public safety policies and procedures in an effort to reflect community values. 
(f)  The commission shall assist the mayor and the Columbus Council in balancing community priorities and resources by advising it on public safety resource issues. 
(g)  The commission shall strive to ensure that the policies and procedures of public safety departments protect the civil rights and liberties of everyone in Columbus. 
(h)  The commission shall promote public safety operations which respect and reflect Columbus' rich culture and diversity. 
(i)  The commission shall work to increase communications, understanding and trust between public safety personnel and citizens of Columbus. 
(j)  The commission shall encourage problem solving and partnerships between citizens, neighborhoods and public safety departments. 
(k)  The commission shall work to provide fair opportunities for citizens and criminal justice professionals to comment and participate with respect to the commission's operations and recommendations to Columbus Council. 
(l)  The commission shall make and present an annual report to the mayor and Columbus Council regarding its activities. 
(m)  Notwithstanding the duties outlined above, the commission shall have no power or authority to investigate, review, or otherwise participate in matters involving specific public safety personnel or specific public safety-related incidents. 
(n)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the commission may by majority vote refer any citizen complaint to the respective department head of any public safety department covered by this article for review or investigation. 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 11-21, § 1, 5-10-11) 
Sec. 2-235. - Composition. 
The commission shall be composed of 11 members, ten to be appointed by the Columbus Council and one to be appointed by the mayor. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of Columbus, Georgia. Five of the initial members shall serve an initial term of one year and shall then be eligible to serve for two additional consecutive three-year terms. Six of the initial members shall be eligible to serve for two consecutive three-year terms. Other than those members serving an initial one-year term, members shall not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. Once appointed, the commission shall elect a chairperson to preside at its meetings which shall be held on a monthly basis. The chief of police shall provide the commission with clerical or administrative assistance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 2-236. - Ex officio members. 
The mayor, city manager, chief of police or his designee, Muscogee County Sheriff or his designee, Chief of Columbus Fire and EMS or his designee and municipal court marshal or his designee, shall be advisors to and ex officio members of the commission, but shall not be entitled to a vote at commission meetings. For purposes of this chapter, "public safety" shall include the Columbus Police Department, Columbus Department of Fire and EMS, the Muscogee County Sheriff's Department and the municipal court marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 04-30, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Secs. 2-237—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION 

Sec. 2-251. - Mission and goal of the office of crime prevention. 
The mission of office of crime prevention is to provide leadership on effective and cost-efficient ways to prevent and to reduce crime by identifying truly outstanding crime prevention programs that meet a high scientific standard of effectiveness and that are innovative initiatives that help stop crime before it starts. 
The goal of the office of crime prevention is to enhance and improve the services offered by various departments and agencies with an aim toward reducing crime and to directly impact the mission of preventing crime. The office of crime prevention will work to streamline and coordinate crime prevention efforts in our city, and to ensure a high level of accountability to the citizens of Columbus, Georgia who passed the local option sales tax in the summer of 2008. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-252. - Office of crime prevention board. 
Composition of the board. There shall be an office of crime prevention board that shall be made up of seven members, including the chair. The mayor shall appoint the chair of the crime prevention board from citizens at large to a three-year term and such member may be reappointed for an additional consecutive three-year term. 
As a second member, the mayor shall appoint one member from law enforcement agencies, including the Muscogee County Sheriff's Office, the Muscogee County Marshal's Office, and the Columbus Police Department. The law enforcement representative shall serve a two-year term and may be reappointed for one additional consecutive two-year term. 
As a third member, the mayor shall appoint a representative of the educational community in Muscogee County to include but not be limited to the Muscogee County School District, Columbus Technical College, and Columbus State University. The education representative shall serve a three-year term and may be reappointed for one additional consecutive three-year term. 
The mayor shall appoint a Fort Benning liaison as a fourth member of the crime prevention board. Such member shall serve a three-year term and may be reappointed for one additional consecutive three-year term. 
Columbus Council shall appoint the remaining three members of the crime prevention board from citizens at large. two of these three members shall be appointed from different senatorial districts serving the city in the state general assembly. These three members shall serve a term of three-years and may be reappointed for one additional consecutive pre-year term. 
The board shall establish a regular meeting schedule, and generally shall meet at least once per month at a time and place designated by the board. One member selected by the board shall serve as secretary, and shall keep the regular minutes of meetings and transmit the same to the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-253. - Duties of the office of crime prevention board. 
The office of crime prevention board shall recommend to the Columbus Council the process and method for awarding service agreements to various agencies for the delivery of crime prevention programs. 
Once the process and method for awarding service agreements is established, the board shall review and select for recommendation to the city council those service agreements that meet the standards and criteria for funding. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-254. - Criteria for selection of vendors. 
The board shall establish the criteria for selection of vendors eligible for funding from the Columbus Consolidated Government. The criteria shall include, but not be limited to, those elements that will help fulfill the mission of the office. The criteria may be revised from time to time. It is anticipated that, for the first several years of operation, funding will be confined to those agencies within the city or other governmental agencies. 
Criteria shall include specific components which identify truly outstanding crime prevention programs that meet a high scientific standard of effectiveness and that are innovative initiatives that help stop crime before it starts. Programs selected for inclusion may fall anywhere along the services continuum from early prevention to aftercare programs for offenders. Some programs may target more than one issue, age group and population. The duration of programs selected may be multi-year programs, but shall not receive funding for more than two years without reapplication. The programs selected for inclusion should address one of the five areas of emphasis noted by the mayor's commission on crime prevention, namely, recreation, education, employment, drug prevention and intervention, and community policing. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-255. - Service agreements. 
In order to obtain funds from the local option sales tax for crime prevention programs, an agency must enter into a written service agreement with the Columbus Consolidated Government. 
Each service agreement will contain, at minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  A completed application form (approved by the board and the Columbus Council) to be executed by the chief executive officer or chairperson of the agency. 
(2)  A full description of the proposed program that will utilize the funds from the city. 
(3)  A budget showing the proposed use of the funds from the city. 
(4)  The agency's current fiscal year budget showing all other funding received by the agency requesting funds, to include all grants, endowments, and all other funding from all sources. 
(5)  The goals of the program proposed by the agency and a timeline for meeting those goals. 
(6)  The method by which the agency and the city will measure the attainment of the goals of the program. 
(7)  An agreement to allow authorized representatives of the city access to the agency's financial records as they pertain to the service agreement program. 
(8)  Any other element as authorized by the board or the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-256. - Director of the office of crime prevention. 
The office of crime prevention shall be established as an entity in the mayor's office. The operating budget for the office shall be a part of the budget for the mayor's office, and shall be shown as a separate section in the Columbus Consolidated Government's fiscal year budget to be approved by the Columbus Council during regular annual budget deliberations. 
A position of director of the office of crime prevention shall be created by separate ordinance of the Columbus Council. This position will have oversight of city controlled funds used to support crime prevention activities within the community. The director will effectively build relationships with community organizations, businesses, and law enforcement to aggressively promote the office of crime prevention and its mission. 
The director of the office of crime prevention will have no jurisdiction over any of the law enforcement agencies in the city. This office is for crime prevention, not law enforcement. The office will work with the various agencies as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-257. - Major duties. 
The major duties of the director of the office of crime prevention shall be as outlined in the official job description for the position. 
At a minimum, the director shall develop and design the procedure to be used by groups seeking service agreements between agencies and the city for crime prevention programs, to include methods that will be used to measure program success and provide accountability of the programs that use city controlled funds. 
The director will plan and coordinate crime prevention programs and activities in association with law enforcement agencies, other governmental agencies, community businesses and nonprofit organizations. The director will actively seek and evaluate crime prevention programs from other jurisdictions, and seek to implement programs as appropriate. The director will also identify, apply for and administer federal, state, foundation and other grant programs relating to crime prevention to further the goal of the city crime prevention program. 
The director will develop and oversee the operating budget of the office of crime prevention, and will serve as liaison to the board of the office of crime prevention. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-258—2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - RETIREE HEALTH BENEFIT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-271. - Mission and goal of the retiree health benefit committee. 
The mission of the retiree health benefit committee is to advise and assist the mayor and Columbus Council with respect to issues concerning the retiree health plan and other benefits provided to retirees of the Columbus, Georgia Consolidated Government. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-272. - Retiree health benefit committee. 
The retiree health benefit committee shall be composed of six members. Of these six, one member shall be appointed by the mayor and four members shall be appointed by the Columbus Council. The sixth member of the committee shall be the President of the Columbus, Georgia Retired City Employee Association, Inc. and this member may serve on the committee as long he or she holds said office; and if the president is not a Columbus resident, the president shall appoint an officer from the Columbus, Georgia Retired City Employee Association, Inc. who resides in Columbus. The committee shall contain at least three active members of the Columbus, Georgia Retiree Health Plan. The director of human resources or his designee shall be an ex-officio member of the committee. The mayor's appointee shall serve as chair and shall serve a term of two years from the date of initial appointment and thereafter; two of the council appointees shall serve for terms of three years from date of initial appointment and thereafter; the two remaining council appointments made in 2017 shall serve an initial term of two years and these two positions shall serve three-year terms thereafter. All appointees shall be eligible to serve two consecutive full terms. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 12-20, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 16-50, § 1, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 17-18, § 1, 4-25-17) 
Sec. 2-273. - Duties of the retiree health benefit committee. 
(1)  The committee shall meet at least quarterly with the director of human resources and any benefit consultant used by Columbus, Georgia to examine issues of health insurance, prescription medical benefits, and any other retiree health benefit. 
(2)  The committee shall advise and assist the mayor and Columbus Council with respect to any proposed amendment to the Columbus, Georgia Retiree Health Plan or any proposed retiree health benefit. 
(3)  The committee shall perform any other duties as requested by the Columbus Council and shall be assisted by the department of human resources in performing these duties. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything in this Code or any oath required by this Code, members of the retiree health benefit committee shall not be required to reside in Columbus, Georgia. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or resolution of the Columbus Council, a member of the retiree health benefit committee shall be able to serve simultaneously on another board, commission or authority of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 13-10, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-13) 
Secs. 2-274—2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS COMMITTEE[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-46, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 2012, enacted provisions intended for codification as Art. XXI, §§ (a)—(c). To facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XXI, §§ 2-291—2-293. 

Sec. 2-291. - Mission and goal of the employee benefits committee. 
The mission of the employee benefits committee is to advise and assist the mayor and Columbus Council with respect to issues concerning the benefits provided to employees of the Columbus, Georgia Consolidated Government, including but not limited to, provision of a health plan, life insurance coverage, voluntary deferred compensation and similar benefits. 
(Ord. No. 12-46, § 1(a), 10-23-12) 
Sec. 2-292. - Employee benefits committee. 
The employee benefits committee shall be composed of seven members, five of which shall be appointed by the Columbus Council, including two department directors or assistant directors. The sixth member shall be selected by general government employees and the seventh member shall be selected by public safety employees. The five members appointed by council shall consist of one sworn officer from any public safety department, two members chosen from general government employees and two department directors or assistant directors. The director of human resources, finance director and a deputy city manager or their designees shall be non-voting ex-officio members of the committee. The public safety appointees shall serve for terms of two years. The general government and department director appointees shall serve for terms of three years. All appointees shall be eligible to serve two consecutive full terms. 
(Ord. No. 12-46, § 1(b), 10-23-12; Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 2-5-13) 
Sec. 2-293. - Duties of the employee benefits committee. 
(1)  The Committee shall meet at least quarterly with the director of human resources and any benefit consultant used by Columbus, Georgia to examine issues of the employee health plan, prescription medical benefits, any other employee health benefit, life insurance, voluntary deferred compensation or any similar benefit. In its discretion, the committee may also hold one or more joint meetings with the retiree health benefit committee. 
(2)  The committee shall advise and assist the mayor and council with respect to any proposed amendment to the Columbus, Georgia employee health plan or any proposed similar benefit. 
(3)  The committee shall perform any other duties as requested by the Columbus Council and shall be assisted by the department of human resources in performing these duties. 
(Ord. No. 12-46, § 1(c), 10-23-12) 
Sec. 2-294. - Resident requirements. 
Notwithstanding anything in this Code or any oath required by this Code, members of the employee benefits committee shall not be required to reside in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 13-9, § 1, 3-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-9, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2013, did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as § 2-294, "resident requirements." 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Possession or use of alcoholic beverages on school grounds and buildings prohibited, § 14-3.2; illegal acts relative to alcoholic beverages generally, § 14-5; consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, § 14-5.1. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages: Includes all liquors wines, and malt beverages. 
(b)  Liquors: All spirituous liquors or distilled spirits commonly known as "whiskey"; any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other solution, and including brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, to include fortified wines as defined by federal or state law. 
(c)  Wines: All alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, including all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of the aforesaid beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products, not including cooking wines, mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(d)  Malt beverages: Fermented beverages commonly known as "beer" made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage containing not more than six percent of alcohol by volume. 
(e)  Mixed drinks: Liquor sold by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(f)  Restaurant: An established place of business: 
(1)  Which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises but promotes the sale of prepared food as a dominant part of the business; 
(2)  Which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; 
(3)  Which derives at least 50 percent of its gross food and beverage income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises; 
(4)  Which has no adult entertainment as described in section 3-1(p) of this Code; 
(5)  Which charges no fee for admission or contests nor allows an independent individual to charge fees for admission or contests on the premises; 
(6)  Which during the normal course of business does not promote or allow contests of skill, dexterity, strength, or talent; and 
(7)  Which serves food during all hours of operation. 
(8)  Nothing in this definition shall prohibit a restaurant from charging viewing fees for sports or sports-related events (limited to football, baseball, basketball, soccer, Olympic events, tennis, and golf; and professional boxing and wrestling) where the promoter thereof charges the restaurant an authorization fee to show said event by screen or video or other electronic conveyance on the premises of the restaurant itself and where the promoter has provided written permission to the restaurant to charge said viewing fee, but all such restaurants shall obtain a permit from the police department for each event (which shall be issued without charge within 30 days of a request) that shall be posted on the premises in a readily visible position, in which event (if such sporting events are advertised), the restaurant shall be known as a "sports bar," even though it shall be classified as a "restaurant" for licensing and definitional purposes. 
(9)  Notwithstanding any other criterion in this section, licensees operating as restaurants may charge after 9:00 p.m. cover charges for live entertainment and contests not adult oriented in nature, provided that they meet all of the distance criteria in Columbus Code sections 3-5(a) and 3-5(b) and 3-5(c) and the 50 percent food sales criterion of subsection (3) of this section and provided further that no persons under the legal drinking age of 21 shall be allowed after the time such licensees begin to charge a cover charge and provided that licensees post a sign provided by the Columbus Consolidated Government and which is visible upon entry to the establishment which shall read " This establishment may charge a cover charge after 9:00 p.m. and no persons under the legal drinking age of 21 shall be allowed on the premises after 9:00 p.m. as per Section 3-1(f)(9) of the Columbus Code. " and upon initial application or upon annual renewal the licensee must indicate the intent to charge a cover charge under this section. Failure to declare the intent to charge a cover charge may result in revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. Restaurants which elect to charge a cover charge are required to comply with section 3-7(c) of the Columbus Code. 
(g)  Hotel or motel: Any hotel, inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire. 
(h)  Private club: Any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(i)  Bar/Pub: An established place of business which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and may serve meals to be consumed on the premises and which also may provide live entertainment or contests involving strength or skill and may provide electronic games or pool tables. 
(j)  Night club: An established place of business which is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (the sale of alcoholic beverages being the dominant part of its business) and which also may provide live entertainment. 
(k)  Owner: Any person or partner or stockholder owning 25 percent or more of a business. 
(l)  Manager: A person hired by a business licensed under this chapter who supervises the operations of that business on a full time basis. 
(m)  Riverboat: Any U.S. Coast Guard-certified passenger vessel licensed under this Chapter to serve alcoholic beverages and licensed by Columbus, Georgia to conduct charter cruises or ticketed excursions from a riverboat landing on the Chattahoochee River with a minimum seating capacity of 50 persons. 
(n)  Multi-purpose theater : Any theater facility located within a UPT or PMUD zone with a minimum seating capacity of 750 persons which offers live entertainment, plays, musicals, dinner theater or leases space for birthday parties, wedding receptions or similar events whether such events are catered by a private catering service or by the licensee; provided, however, that the 600-foot prohibition contained in section 3-5(d) shall not apply to a multi-purpose theater licensee. 
(o)  Bowling center: An establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues either from the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment or from the combination of the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment and the sale of prepared meals and other food products. 
(p)  Adult oriented establishment: Those establishments that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and that offer or conduct adult oriented activities which include but are not limited to partially nude dancing or partially nude modeling. 
(q)  Employee: A person that works for an establishment in any capacity, full time or part time, whether on a regular payroll or as a contract agent. 
(r)  Transient entertainment: That entertainment which is temporary in nature (such as traveling bands, performers, comedians, etc.) which has a limited engagement under ten days for which advance written notice to the police department is required. 
(s)  Partially nude dancing: Dancing or appearing partially nude but at minimum with the human male or female genitals, pubic area and buttocks and all of the nipples of the breast of a female being at least shielded and covered by a fully opaque covering. 
(t)  Totally nude dancing: Dancing or appearing in a total state of nakedness without the protection or benefit of the minimal coverings required for partially nude dancing. 
(u)  Public indecency: Means and shall include the following: 
(1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse, actual or simulated; 
(2)  Engaging in masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(3)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct, to include oral copulation, anal intercourse, anal copulation, oral anal copulation, bestiality, fellatio, cunnilingus, buggery, or sodomy; 
(4)  Engaging in a state of total nudity as opposed to partial nudity, to include any exposure of the male or the female genitalia, the anus, or the nipples of the female breast in any adult oriented establishment; 
(5)  Fondling the genitals of oneself or another person; 
(6)  Dancing with the male genitals covered but in a discernibly turgid state; 
(7)  Any other acts described in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(v)  Multi-purpose facility: A facility licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, with a minimum seating capacity of 750 persons, which is owned, operated, managed, used, or controlled by the Columbus Consolidated Government or by an authority thereof. The facility may offer live entertainment (but no adult entertainment as defined in section 3-1 (p)), trade shows, plays, musicals, dinner theater, cultural events, athletic games, recreational activities, and functions authorized by the consolidated government; or leases space for birthday parties, weddings, receptions, or similar events. 
(w)  Municipal golf course: A facility licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and operated by a city authority for the specific use and enjoyment of playing golf by the public. Tournaments and contests may be held at these facilities. 
(x)  Municipal sports facility: A facility licensed to sell alcoholic beverages owned and either operated, or leased by the city to a professional athletic team, for the purpose of paid spectator sports. 
(y)  Audit: To verify records presented to the occupation tax section or its successors for the payment of excise tax or other taxes related to alcoholic beverages or for the renewal of or the maintaining of an alcoholic beverage license. The audit may include on site inspections of beverage establishments and inspection of records pertinent to determining compliance to the conditions set forth in Chapter 3. 
(z)  Auditor: Individual who is employed either by the city, or is an agent of the city who performs the function of the audit. 
(aa)  Dinner theater: An established place of business that is defined as a restaurant as in section 3-1(f) with the exception that a fee may be collected upon entrance to the business which provides theatrical entertainment during the course of the meal. 
(bb)  Community teen center: an established place of business whose sole business or whose dominant line of business as defined in section 19-37(b)(3) is comprised of activities targeted at teenagers, including but not limited to, proms, dances, sports, and school-related activities. 
(cc)  Importer: Any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
(dd)  Broker: Any person who purchases or obtains an alcoholic beverage from an importer, distillery, brewery, or winery and sells the alcoholic beverage to another broker, importer, or wholesaler without having custody of the alcoholic beverage or maintaining a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
(ee)  Traditional restaurant : An established place of business located in the UPT, CRD, GC, NCCO, and PMUD zones, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Promotes the sale of prepared food as a dominant part of the business; 
(2)  Licensed to sell mixed drinks for consumption on the premises only; 
(3)  Provides adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; 
(4)  Derives at least 80 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises; 
(5)  Provides no adult entertainment as described in subsection 3-1(p) of the Code; 
(6)  Imposes no fees for cover charges, fees for admission or entrance, viewing fees/pay per view fees or fees for contests/tournaments or live entertainment, nor allows an independent individual to charge fees for cover charges, admission or entrance, viewing fees or fees for contests/tournaments or live entertainment on the premises. No live entertainment shall be permitted on the premises; 
(7)  Does not promote or allow tournaments or contests of skill, dexterity, strength, or talent; 
(8)  Serves food during all hours of operation; 
(9)  Impose no age restrictions during any of its hours of operation; 
(10)  Reserved; 
(11)  Musical instruments or sound reproduction devices shall not be operated or used within a patio/deck or on public right-of-way; 
(12)  Owners, applicants, managers and employees shall be responsible for keeping a clean, orderly place, and no patrons shall be allowed to stand, sit, mingle, or assemble outside the building in parking lots or automobiles while drinking alcoholic beverages or causing a disturbance of any kind; 
(13)  From Sunday through Thursday, the normal operating hours shall be between 6:01 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. From Friday through Saturday, the normal operating hours shall be between 6:01 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. No customer shall be permitted to remain on the premises for more than 20 minutes after the normal operating hours. 
(ff)  Small multi-purpose theatre : Any theatre facility located within a CRD, MROD, or PMUD zone with a seating capacity between 350 and 749 persons which meets all of the following elements: 
(1)  Offers live entertainment, plays, musicals, dinner theater or leases space for birthday parties, wedding receptions or similar events; 
(2)  Offers alcoholic beverages only when such beverages have been purchased by the licensee permanently located at such premises; except that a bona fide non-profit charitable organization may lease such premises and obtain a special event alcoholic beverage permit that allows such charity to receive alcohol donated by a licensed wholesaler; 
(3)  Provides no adult entertainment as described in subsection 3-1(p) and Chapter 14, Article VI of this Code; 
(4)  Maintains the following operating hours: from Monday through Saturday, the normal operating hours shall be between 6:01 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Sunday normal hours of operations shall be between 6:01 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. Sunday hours of operations shall not involve the selling or serving of any alcoholic beverages unless theatre meets requirements outlined in section 3-13 of this Code. No customer shall be permitted to remain on the premises for more than 20 minutes after the normal operating hours cease; 
(5)  Owners, applicant, managers and employees shall be responsible for keeping a clean, orderly place, and no patrons shall be allowed to stand, sit, mingle or assemble outside the building in parking lots or automobiles while drinking alcoholic beverages or causing a disturbance of any kind; 
(6)  Any individual leasing or renting the theatre and wishing to impose any fees for cover charges, fees for admission/entrance, fees for contests/tournaments or live entertainment shall hold a valid business license and pay all applicable fees and taxes due on all revenues earned; except that a bona fide non-profit charitable organization shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(gg)  Non-alcohol retail establishment : Any business located within UPT, CRD, GC, NC, CO, or PMUD zones with a dominant line of business that does not involve the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages that obtains an on-premises license pursuant to this chapter in order to sell, or serve wine and malt beverages to customers on their business premises in the following limited circumstances: 
(1)  The business, during all hours of operation, must sell a product or provide a service unrelated to alcoholic beverages that accounts for 80 percent of the business' gross revenue. 
(2)  Events where alcohol sale or service is permitted on said business premises shall only take place between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, but this will in no way restrict the hours of operation for the dominant line of business when no alcohol sale or service is taking place. 
(3)  The wine and malt beverages offered must have been purchased from a licensed wholesaler by the licensee permanently located at such premises; except that a bona fide non-profit charitable organization may lease such premises and obtain a special event alcoholic beverage permit that allows such charity to receive alcohol donated by a licensed wholesaler. 
(4)  The non-alcohol retail establishment shall provide no adult entertainment as described in subsection 3-1 (p) above. Chapter 14, articles IV and VI of this Code, and chapter 13 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(5)  Owners, applicants, managers and employees shall be responsible for keeping a clean, orderly place, and no patrons shall be allowed to stand, sit, mingle, or assemble outside the building in parking lots or automobiles while drinking alcoholic beverages or causing a disturbance of any kind. 
(6)  Persons under the age of 21 may be permitted on the businesses premises at any time; provided that no alcohol shall be served to any person under 21 years of age during the times when wine and malt beverages are being served. 
(7)  The alcoholic beverage license and permit of a non-alcohol retail establishment business shall not be transferable to any other license, person, or business. Non-alcohol retail establishment licensees shall not be permitted to cater or sell alcoholic beverages outside of licensed premises. 
(8)  No cover charges or other fees for admission will be charged unless it is related to the provision of the goods or services of the licensee's dominant line of business. In such situations the licensee shall hold a valid business license and pay all applicable fees and taxes due on all revenues earned; except that a bona fide non-profit charitable organization shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(9)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (3) above and section 3-16 hereinafter, a non-alcohol retail establishment may pay an additional on-premises fee of $1,000.00 to the finance department at the same time the annual wine and malt beverage license is obtained which will permit customers to bring their own malt beverages and wine onto the business premises during hours when alcoholic beverages could otherwise be sold pursuant to this sub-section. 
(hh)  "Growler: A bottle made of glass or other material or other material customary to the industry provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a screw cap and then sealed with a plastic collar over the screw for the purpose of open container laws, and such bottle shall be at least 16 oz. but not exceed 64 oz. in capacity. The sale of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for establishments licensed to sell beer off premise pursuant to Columbus Code Section 3-3(c). However, growlers may not be sold by any establishment also licensed to sell liquors off premise pursuant to Columbus Code Section 3-3(a). The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Provided however, a brewpub licensee, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, may also fill growlers from kegs of beer manufactured on its own premises as permitted under its state brewpub license. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited unless the same premises also holds a valid on premise license; provided however, samples of beers available for sale in a growler may be offered on the premises but each sample shall not exceed one ounce nor shall any one individual be offered more than three samples in one calendar day. 
(ii)  Designated beverage concessionaire : A licensee selected by the management of a public stadiums, coliseums or auditoriums owned or controlled by the city or by a public authority having seating capacity in excess of 2,500 to provide alcohol sales at that location. 
(jj)  Microbrewery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured or brewed beer or malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the hours of operation of a licensed microbrewery shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(kk)  Microdistillery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of distilled spirits are manufactured on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.2. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the hours of operation of a licensed microdistillery shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 83-8, § 1, 31-83; Ord. No. 83-9, § 1, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 95-99, §§ 1—5, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 99-87, § 1, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 99-92, §§ 1—10, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 1—8, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-43, § 1, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 00-60, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 00-90, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 04-1, § 1, 1-6-04; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 09-11, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 10-56, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 11-60, § 1, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 13-50, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 14-5, § 1, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 16-31, § 1, 7-26-16; Ord. No. 19-012, § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 3-2. - Director of finance to administer issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses and to report to council. 
(a)  All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses shall fill out and sign a notarized application form prescribed by the director of finance which shall contain all necessary information for a determination of the qualifications of the applicants and which shall contain the names of the owners of the businesses for which licenses are proposed. 
(b)  The director of finance shall examine the qualifications of an applicant for any type of alcoholic beverage license and the qualifications of the owner of the business, and shall then forward the application to the chief of police. The chief of police, or his designee, will conduct an investigation of the police record of the applicant and owner and his findings shall be forwarded to the director of finance within five working days from receipt of the director's request for information and, if the director of finance determines that an applicant and owner meet the criteria established by ordinance for the issuance or transfer of that particular type of alcoholic beverage license, he shall so issue the license. 
(c)  The director of finance shall submit monthly to the council through the clerk of council a list of those who have received any of the various types of alcoholic beverage licenses. The name and address of each applicant along with the location of the establishment and the type of alcoholic beverage license shall be included. Upon receipt of this report, the council shall by resolution receive and approve the same. 
(d)  The director of finance shall also submit monthly a list of those applicants who did not meet the criteria established for the licenses for which they applied. He shall also submit the reason or reasons why each of these applicants did not qualify for an alcoholic beverage license. Upon receipt of this report, the council shall by resolution receive and approve the same unless any applicant has requested a public hearing before the council to show that he does meet the criteria established within Chapter 3 for the particular category of license he is seeking. Such applicant shall be heard by the council, but no license shall be approved after the director of finance has denied a license unless there has been a mistake of fact concerning the ability of an applicant to meet the criteria established which can be shown to the satisfaction of a majority of the members of council. 
(e)  Both reports shall be available for public examination in the office of the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 82-85, § 1, 11-16-82) 
Sec. 3-3. - License taxes. 
(a)  Each person selling liquors off premise in the city shall pay for each place of business an annual license tax as follows: 
Wholesalers ..... $2,500.00 
Retailers ..... 2,000.00 
Importers ..... 1,000.00 
Brokers ..... 100.00 
(b)  Each person selling wines in the city shall pay for each place of business an annual license tax as follows: 
Wholesalers ..... $500.00 
Retailers on premises ..... 300.00 
Retailers off premises ..... 150.00 
Importers ..... 500.00 
Brokers ..... 50.00 
(c)  Each person selling malt beverages in the city shall pay for each place of business an annual license tax as follows: 
Wholesalers ..... $1,000.00 
Retailers on premises ..... 500.00 
Retailers off premises ..... 300.00 
Importers ..... 500.00 
Brokers ..... 50.00 
(d)  An annual license tax of $1,500.00 shall be charged for the initial license issued to any mixed drink licensee and for each year thereafter an annual license tax in the amount of five percent of the previous year's sales with a minimum of $750.00 and a maximum of $5,000.00. The holder of a mixed drink license may also sell wines and malt beverages for consumption on premises without purchasing additional licenses therefore, and such sales shall be included in the total sales used for computing license fees. 
(e)  All new licenses shall be effective during the remainder of the calendar year in which they are issued and all renewals shall be effective from January 1 through December 31. Taxes for new licenses shall be paid prior to the issuance thereof, and taxes for renewals shall be paid on or before December 31 for the ensuing year. Any person engaging in wholesaling or retailing alcoholic beverages who does not purchase his license on or before December 31, shall pay in addition to the regular tax a penalty of ten percent before such license shall be issued. 
(f)  None of the above license taxes shall be prorated for fractions of years. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 01-53, § 3, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 04-1, § 2, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-4. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  Each wholesaler who sells to retailers located in Columbus, Georgia shall pay an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter on the sale of liquors and wines, and an excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12 ounces on the sale of malt beverages (or proportionately thereof so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans and containers of various sizes) plus an excise tax on malt beverages of $6.00 for each container of 15 and 1/2 gallons and a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(b)  Excise taxes for liquors, wines, and malt beverages shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold. 
(c)  Wholesalers shall keep for a period of at least three years from the date of sales such records as are necessary for the determination of the amounts of excise taxes to be paid under this section. The director of finance may prescribe the form and content of such records and these records shall be available at all times for inspection by the director of finance or his authorized agent. 
(d)  At the time of the sale, wholesalers shall collect the excise taxes prescribed in this section from retailers to whom they sell alcoholic beverages and the wholesalers shall remit amounts due to the consolidated government finance department via the revenue collection officer, together with reports or records necessary for a determination of the amount of taxes collected. 
(e)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were delinquent and a further penalty of an additional ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for an additional penalty equal to 20 percent of the amount of the remittance which would have been required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(f)  Each mixed drink licensee shall pay an excise tax of three percent upon the sale of distilled spirits to the public (O.C.G.A. 3-4-130). The excise taxes shall be paid by the mixed drink licensee to the consolidated government finance department on or before the twentieth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold. A monthly excise tax report shall be remitted with payment. The failure to make a timely report and remittance and/or filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render a mixed drink licensee liable for penalties and/or interest. Mixed drink licensees shall be allowed a reimbursement as prescribed in O.C.G.A. 48-8-50 for reports and payment of taxes in a timely manner. This subsection shall become effective October 1, 2001. 
(g)  The excise taxes provided for herein above shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia, upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale within Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 01-53, §§ 4—6, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 04-1, § 3, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-5. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to issue off-premises alcoholic beverage licenses within 200 feet of the following locations, and on-premises alcoholic beverage licenses within 300 feet of the following locations: Girls' clubs, boys' clubs, Y.M.C.A.'s, funeral chapels, city playgrounds; areas zoned SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, SFR4, RMF1, RMF2, and RMH; private residences, whether such residences be single-family, duplexes or apartments; but the provisions hereof concerning private residences and areas zoned SFR1, SFR2, SFR3, SFR4, RMF1, RMF2 and RMH shall not apply to a restaurant or a hotel located within an area zoned H and shall not apply where a majority of the private residences within the prohibited distance are within an area zoned UPT, NC, GC, RO, LMI HMI or PMUD or where a majority of the land within the prohibited distance is zoned UPT, NC, GC, RO, LMI or HMI, or PMUD and where the applicant is a private club or the applicant's business is a hotel-motel or a restaurant or a non-alcohol retail establishment or where an off-premises alcoholic beverages license is to be issued. An off-premises license to sell malt beverages and wines may be issued, despite distance restrictions contained in this Code section, if the licensed premises are greater than 100,000 square feet and a majority of the land within 200 feet of the licensed premises is zoned UPT, NC, GC, RO, LMI or HMI. Owner and/or applicant managers and employees shall be responsible for keeping a clean, orderly place, and no patrons shall be allowed to stand, sit, mingle or assemble outside the building in parking lots or automobiles while drinking alcoholic beverages or causing a disturbance of any kind. For purposes of this chapter, "city playgrounds" means an area, owned by the city or other governmental agency, open to the general public for recreational purposes, which includes slides, swings, climbing apparatus, or similar equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to issue alcoholic beverage licenses within 300 feet of the grounds of any church. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to issue liquor and mixed drinks beverage licenses within 600 feet and to issue wine and malt beverage licenses within 300 feet of the grounds of any community teen center or any school or school playground, including church nursery schools, church day care centers and adjoining playgrounds; provided, however, where the applicant's business is a hotel or motel or a restaurant and the license applied for by such applicant for such business is for retail sale for consumption on the premises only, the prohibited distance for mixed drinks, wine or malt beverage licenses shall be 300 feet. For purposes of on-premises consumption licenses for beer, wine or mixed drinks, the term "school" does not extend to educational levels above the 12 th grade. 
In accordance with state law, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, there shall be no prohibited distance between a school building or grounds or a college campus and a premises licensed as a "grocery store" for the off-premises sale of wine or malt beverages. A "grocery store" is defined as a retail establishment which has at least 85 percent of its retail floor space reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and makes all its alcohol sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to issue an on-premises alcoholic beverage license in the categories of bar pub, night club, or adult oriented entertainment establishment within 600 feet of a location already holding or which has held within the past 12 months a valid on-premises alcoholic beverage license for any one of those same three categories. 
(e)  The distance related to prohibited locations for licenses shall be measured as follows in accordance with current state law and regulation: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the business regulated under this chapter; 
(2)  To the front door of a church or any other protected or prohibited location but to the nearest property line of any school or property being used for educational purposes. 
(3)  As measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, drink, or possess any alcoholic beverages upon any of the parks and recreational areas owned by Columbus, Georgia, except under rules established by the city manager, but such rules shall be consistent with other provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  (1)  Alcoholic beverage licensees located within the Central Riverfront District (CRD) provided in section 2.3.3 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) a Mill Restoration Overlay District (MROD) provided in section 2-5.18, and a Planned Mixed Use Development (PMUD) provided in section 2.5.16 of the UDO ordinance and set forth on a plat which shall remain on file in the revenue division shall not be subject to the provisions of subsections 3-5(a) and 3-5(d) of this chapter. Owners, applicant managers and employees of such licensees shall be responsible for keeping a clean, orderly place, and no patrons shall be allowed to stand, sit, mingle or assemble outside the building in parking lots or automobiles while drinking alcoholic beverages or to cause a disturbance of any kind. Owners and applicant managers within the CRD, the MROD, and a PMUD shall be subject to all other provisions of chapter 3 of the Columbus Code. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-5(b), the finance director shall be authorized to issue alcoholic beverage licenses for restaurant uses only located within the Central Riverfront Zoning District,, a Mill Restoration Overlay District or a PMUD if such restaurant is located at least 250 feet away from the grounds of any church; provided, however, no such restaurant shall be permitted to impose a cover charge for live entertainment or contests pursuant to subsection 3-1(f)(9). Restaurants permitted under this subsection shall be prohibited from conducting outdoor sales of alcoholic beverages on public right-of-way unless permission is obtained from the city manager pursuant to subsection 3-12(i). 
(h)  All locations for alcoholic beverage licenses which do not meet the distance requirements or the issuance of a new license, but which, nevertheless, were operating with a valid license issued prior to restrictions for location imposed by this chapter or previous ordinances, are despite the restrictions of this chapter, eligible for reissuance of the same category of license or restaurant license if application therefore is made within one year of the date that the business operations for the previous license ceased. This provision shall not apply to non-alcohol retail establishments as defined in subsection 3-1 (gg) of this chapter. 
(i)  Traditional restaurant licenses, as defined in this chapter, located in zoning districts UPT, CRD, GC, NC, CO and PMUD shall not be subject to the distance restrictions of this chapter. 
(j)  Broker licenses, as defined in this chapter, shall not be subject to the distance restrictions of this chapter. Signage advertising such an application shall not be required. 
(k)  Notwithstanding the distance restrictions contained in this Code section, on-premises licensees holding alcoholic beverage licenses as a restaurant, hotel, bowling center, traditional restaurant or non-alcohol retail establishment may be licensed under this chapter if located within 1,500 feet of the perimeter property line of the Columbus Airport and if located on a parcel zoned GC, CO, LMI, or HMI. 
(l)  Notwithstanding the distance restrictions contained in this Code section, off-premise licensees that fit the definition of a grocery store as set forth in O.C.G.A § 3-3-21(a)(1)(B), may be licensed under this chapter if located on a parcel zoned GC, NC, UPT or CRD. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 79-15, § 1, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 79-16, § 1, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 79-32, §§ 1, 2, 4-3-79; Ord. No. 81-70, § 1, 7-14-81; Ord. No. 81-102, § 1, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1, 4-26-83; Ord. No. 84-86, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 84-106, §§ 1, 2, 11-20-84; Ord. No. 86-81, 7-22-86; Ord. No. 87-50, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 87-53, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 88-104, 10-25-88; Ord. No. 88-108, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 89-36, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 90-97, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 90-103, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 91-72, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 91-105, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 92-66, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 92-70, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 93-80, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 94-34, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 95-99, §§ 6—9, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 97-45, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 97-45, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 03-21, § 1, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 03-94, § 1, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 04-1, § 4, 1-6-04; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 09-11, § 2, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 11-49, § 1, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 11-60, § 2, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-48, § 1, 11-27-12; Ord. No. 14-5, § 2, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 14-15, § 2, 3, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 15-59, § 1, 12-8-15) 
Sec. 3-6. - Persons prohibited. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to the following persons or entities: 
(1)  Persons who are not citizens of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
(2)  A partnership. 
(3)  A corporation. 
(4)  A Limited Liability Partnership (LLP). 
(5)  A Limited Liability Company (LLC). 
(6)  Law enforcement officers and their spouses. 
(7)  Persons whose businesses are managed by those who do not meet the criteria established in subsections (b), (c), and (d). 
(8)  Persons other than owners or managers. 
(9)  Applicants for licenses in businesses of which the owner or owners do not meet the criteria established in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e). 
(10)  No persons under the minimum legal drinking age as established in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 3-3-23. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bond on any federal or state felony offense within ten years of the application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued such a license, nor shall such license be renewed. 
(c)  No person who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bond on any federal or state misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude or alcohol or drugs within five years of application for any alcoholic beverage license shall be issued such a license, nor shall any such license be renewed; except, for renewal purposes only, two alcohol related misdemeanor offenses shall be required to prohibit renewal, but any holder of a license who is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeits bond on an offense of selling alcoholic beverages to a minor at a licensed establishment and any person convicted of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeiting bond on a second alcohol related misdemeanor offense shall immediately, but subject to the revocation procedures of Columbus Code section 3-11, have his or her license revoked. 
(d)  No person who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeited bond on any ordinance violation involving alcohol or drugs or prostitution or pimping or sodomy or other sexual matters in Columbus, Georgia, or any other political subdivision within two years of the application for an alcoholic beverage shall be issued such a license, nor shall any such license be renewed; except, for renewal purposes only, two alcohol related ordinance violations shall be required to prohibit renewal; no waivers shall be allowed by the Council of Columbus, Georgia; notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection, any person convicted of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to or forfeiting bond on any violation within this subsection for a second time shall immediately, subject to the revocation procedures of section 3-11, have his or her license revoked. 
(e)  No person who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bond as a habitual violator pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391 and § 40-6-391.2 within the past ten years shall be issued such a license, nor shall such license be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 79-18, § 1, 2-20-79; Ord. No. 79-93, § 1, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 79-159, §§ 2, 3, 12-27-79; Ord. No. 81-52, § 1, 6-16-81; Ord. No. 81-147, § 1, 12-22-81; Ord. No. 82-85, § 2, 11-16-82; Ord. No. 86-41, §§ 1—3, 4-29-86; Ord. No. 90-38, §§ 1, 2, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 91-16, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 95-30, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 95-99, §§ 10, 11, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 95-110, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 14, 15, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-112, § 2, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 04-1, § 5, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-7. - Procedure for applying for licenses and for certifying employees. 
(a)  The following procedures shall be followed by all applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses: 
(1)  Where no building is erected at a location proposed for the sale of alcoholic beverages or where there is not an existing license, the applicant for such license shall identify the proposed location with the building number which the proposed building shall bear and the type of license applied for. The applicant shall request of and pay the cost to the city to erect a sign upon the premises showing the number of the proposed building and that said application is pending. Said signs shall be located within one foot of the right-of-way of the city street upon which said proposed business fronts and shall read as follows: 
NOTICE 
Proposed Building No.  _____ 
_____  Street 
Alcoholic Beverage License Application Pending 
Type License Applied For:  _____ 
Name of Applicant:  _____ 
Address of Applicant:  _____ 
Date of Application:  _____ 
The applicant shall request of and pay the nonrefundable cost of such sign to the Columbus Consolidated Government. The request and payment must be made within a period of time allowing the city to erect the sign at least 30 days before the license is applied for and shall remain up continuously during the pendency of the application. The applicant shall remove the sign within ten days after such application is acted on by the director of finance. 
(2)  Such sign shall be of wood or metal, at least 48 inches by 72 inches in size and the lettering thereon shall be at least three inches in height, and a picture thereof shall be attached to the license application. 
(3)  The sign erected pursuant to the provisions hereof shall contain no additional advertisement or words other than that which is specified herein. 
(4)  All applications for new licenses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance of the proposed premises from any prohibited locations covered in section 3-5. Such survey shall be coordinated and conducted by a registered surveyor contracted by the city, and the nonrefundable cost of such survey shall be paid by the applicant to the Columbus Consolidated Government when the application is submitted. 
(b)  At the time of submitting an application, the applicant, owner(s), stockholder(s), partners, and manager(s) shall complete and submit a form waiver for police records check. 
(c)  In the case of all night clubs as defined in section 3-1(j) and all adult oriented establishments as defined in section 3-1(p) and those bar/pubs as defined in section 3-1(i) where their major source of income is from the sale of alcohol, the following procedures shall be followed by owners and applicants for licenses and employees: 
(1)  Prior to or at the time of submitting an application, the applicant for a license and the owner of the proposed business shall submit themselves to the police department for fingerprinting. 
(2)  Licensees and employees of such businesses shall possess a valid identification card prior to the date of their first work in an establishment. The employee shall first report to the police department of Columbus, Georgia for the purpose of applying for an identification card. In the event that an employee has a record of a violation of the type and within the period of time which would disqualify a person from holding an alcoholic beverage license, the chief of police within 30 days of application shall issue a letter to the employee and to the employer stating that the employee is ineligible for employment. Persons holding valid employee identification cards prior to January 6, 2004 are, despite the restrictions of this chapter, eligible to renew such employee identification cards through the Columbus Police Department as long as no new disqualifying offenses under section 3-6 have occurred since January 6, 2004. 
(3)  The chief of police shall within 30 days of application furnish to each qualified licensee and employee an identification card with pertinent information thereon relating to the height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, social security number and photograph of the holder of such identification card. A non-refundable fee in the amount of $6.00 shall be charged for the preparation of such identification card. It shall be the responsibility of the employer to see that the employees are carrying with them an identification card at all times they are working. Said identification card will expire each year on the birth date of the applicant and must be renewed at such time, and said card must at all times be in the possession of such person affected hereunder for him to be eligible to engage in such business. 
(4)  Licensees shall submit written notice to the police department of the identity of transient entertainers, and such notice must be received in advance of their performance. 
(d)  All applicants for new mixed drink licenses shall give notice of their intent to make such application by advertising at least five times on different days in the daily paper published in the city in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried. Such notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation or an association, the names of the corporate manager or association manager to whom issued and the date such application would be considered by the director of finance. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch, two-column advertisement. 
(e)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses, in addition to all other fees, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50.00 payable to the Columbus Consolidated Government, but the holder of one type of alcoholic beverage license who seeks to obtain another type of alcoholic beverage license at the same location shall not be required to pay this fee. 
(f)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license or card shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation or nonrenewal of such license or card. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, renewal of an expired identification card (ABC card) shall be permitted if the only disqualifying violation of the applicant is failure to possess a current ABC card within a 12-month period prior to application for renewal. A $25.00 late application fee shall be collected from all such applicants. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 81-146, § 1, 12-22-81; Ord. No. 82-35, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 82-85, § 3, 11-16-82; Ord. No. 84-75, §§ 1—3, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 88-26, 3-15-88; Ord. No. 91-12, 2-26-91; Ord. No. 95-99, § 12, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 95-110, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 99-92, §§ 11, 12, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 16, 17, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-51, §§ 1—3, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 05-44, § 1, 6-11-05; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 3-8. - Approval and issuance. 
(a)  The director of finance shall either approve or disapprove all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses within a period of 21 business days from the date of the filing of such application. 
(b)  The director of finance shall issue licenses upon payment of the proper license fee by a qualified applicant, but in no event shall the director of finance issue a license more than 12 months after the date of the approval of a new application, or, if the licensed premises will exceed 100,000 square feet, more than 24 months after the date of the approval of a new application. The director of finance shall not issue a license more than three months after the date of the approval of a transfer application. 
(c)  All licenses shall be conspicuously posted in the licensee's place of business and shall set forth the name of the licensee and the address of the business and the type of license. 
(d)  The director of finance shall neither approve nor issue any alcoholic beverage license to any applicant who applies for an alcoholic beverage license within a period of one year from the date of disapproval of an application for cause based on failure to meet any criteria contained in section 3-6. When an application for an alcoholic beverage license has been disapproved based on failure to meet any criteria contained in section 3-5, an applicant may reapply one time only for an alcoholic beverage license at the same location within a period of one year from the date of disapproval and an applicant may reapply for an alcoholic beverage license at a different location without a one-year waiting period. The director of finance shall neither approve nor issue any alcoholic beverage license to any applicant who applies for an alcoholic beverage license within a period of one year from the date of revocation of a previous license. 
(e)  The director of finance shall neither approve nor issue any alcoholic beverage license to any applicant who applies for an alcoholic beverage license within a period of one year from the date of nonrenewal of a previous license. The term "applicant" as used above in subsection (d) and in this subsection includes the original applicant, the original applicant's spouse or cohabitant, a relative of the original applicant within the second degree of consanguinity, so as to include a step, adopted, or foster, parent, sibling, grandparent, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, and first cousin. The term "applicant" shall also include any partner or stockholder of the original applicant's partnership or corporation, and any person who has acquired the original applicant's business other than through a bona fide sale. The burden is upon the party seeking the license to prove that the sale of the business is bona fide. However, if the revocation or nonrenewal was due to the applicant's failure to satisfy the food sale requirement of a conditional location pursuant to an audit under section 3-20, the applicant may reapply for an alcoholic beverage license for an unconditional location without waiting a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 95-29, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 95-119, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 01-80, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 04-1, § 6, 1-6-04; Ord. No. 14-15, § 4, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 3-9. - Transfers. 
(a)  An alcoholic beverage license may be transferred if: 
(1)  All taxes owed to the city are paid in full. 
(2)  The new applicant, owner(s), stockholder(s), partners, and manager(s) possess the requisite qualifications. 
(3)  If the transfer is due to a change in ownership of the business, the alcoholic beverage application must have been applied for and approved prior to the sale of the business. An alcoholic beverage license may not be issued until the new owner has established that the sale of the business is bona fide. 
(b)  A license may be transferred without a transfer fee to the estate of a deceased owner provided that the representative of the estate possesses the requisite qualifications and has presented legal documentations to show that he or she is executor or representative of the estate. 
(1)  The representative shall transfer the license within 60 days after the death of a deceased owner, or the license will be subject to revocation under this chapter. 
(c)  The owner of a business may transfer a license from one manager to another provided: 
(1)  The new manager meets the requisite qualifications. 
(2)  In the case where a manager holds a license, but leaves the business, the owner shall transfer the license to himself or a qualifying manager within 60 days of termination of the original manager, or the license will be subject to revocation under this chapter. 
(d)  A license may be transferred from one location to another provided the new location meets the requisite qualifications. 
(e)  The following transfer fees, payable to Columbus Consolidated Government, are imposed: 
(1)  $50.00 for transfers to new locations except where the transfer is necessitated by an act of God, or an act of law, in which event there will be no transfer fee. 
(2)  $500.00 for the transfer of all mixed drinks licenses with a $50.00 transfer fee for subsequent transfers of the same kind in the same calendar year, except mixed drinks licenses for nonprofit corporations for which the first transfer fee will be $100.00. 
(3)  For all other transfers of all other alcoholic beverage licenses a fee of 50 percent of the price of the license. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this chapter, a hotel licensee may transfer a license to a restaurant licensee and a restaurant licensee may transfer a license to a hotel licensee if both the hotel and the restaurant are located within the same building where the hotel operations are conducted. Such a transfer may only be made once during any calendar year. Such transfers shall not be permitted for any hotel or restaurant which has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked or where renewal of such a license has been denied within the preceding 12 months. 
(g)  An alcoholic beverage license that has been revoked or nonrenewed may not be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 82-61, § 1, 8-10-82; Ord. No. 99-92, § 13, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 02-112, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 04-1, § 7, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-10. - Renewals. 
(a)  All licensees shall renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the director of finance to be submitted with the taxes required for the renewed license. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no license shall be renewed where the licensee commits any act in violation of federal, state, or local laws or ordinances, or does anything else that would disqualify him on an original license application, nor shall any license be renewed where a new owner cannot qualify as provided in an original application. No person can qualify as a "new owner" if such person is the original licensee's spouse or cohabitant, a relative of the original licensee within the second degree of consanguinity, which term includes a step, adopted, or foster, parent, sibling, grandparent, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, and first cousin. In addition, no partner or stockholder of the original licensee's partnership or corporation, or any person who has acquired the original licensee's business other than through a bona fide sale, shall constitute a "new owner". The burden is upon the new owner to prove that the sale of the business is bona fide. 
(c)  All renewal forms shall indicate any changes of ownership of the licensed business, and all new owners shall undergo the same procedures prescribed for owners on original license applications. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 82-85, § 4, 11-16-82; Ord. No. 04-1, § 8, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-11. - Revocation. 
(a)  The following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of all alcoholic beverage licenses: 
(1)  a.  Failure of wholesaler or retailer to pay license or excise taxes; or 
b.  Improper collection of excise taxes pursuant to this chapter or O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130 on two or more occasions within a five-year period. 
(2)  Commission of any act in violation of the federal, state or local laws or ordinances which would disqualify a person from obtaining a license. 
(3)  Selling or distributing or buying alcoholic beverages on which no local or state tax has been paid. 
(4)  Commission of any acts in violation of federal, state or local laws or ordinances or running of a licensed business where such violations frequently or regularly occur so as to cause the chief of police or director of public safety to recommend a revocation of the license. 
(5)  Failure to abide by any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Providing false information to influence determination of license taxes or food/alcohol ratios. 
(7)  Conducting of activities described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 (e), (f), or (g), as now or hereafter amended, upon licensed premises where probable cause has been found by the recorder, including bond forfeitures, guilty pleas, nolo contendere pleas or the binding of such a case over to a higher court by the recorder. 
(8)  Forfeiting bond, pleading guilty, or pleading nolo contendere to conducting any of the gambling activities described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2, as now or hereafter amended, upon licensed premises. 
(b)  The following procedures shall be followed in revoking all alcoholic beverage licenses: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the holder of a license at least two weeks in advance that the Council of Columbus, Georgia will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked, and this notice shall include the specific grounds on which this recommendation to council will be made. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall notify the license holder, the director of finance and the chief of police or the director of public safety as to the time that a recommendation for revocation will be heard. 
(3)  The Council of Columbus, Georgia shall hear a recommendation for revocation before or during one of its regular meetings at which time the holder of a license and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No license shall be revoked until a majority of the council so decides at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(5)  After council takes action to revoke, licensees will surrender beverage licenses to the issuing authority. 
(6)  The procedures for revoking alcoholic beverage licenses shall also apply to nonrenewals of alcoholic beverage licenses, and hearings before the Columbus Council on revocations shall be held within 30 days from the date of a decision to recommend revocation while council hearings on nonrenewals shall be held within 30 days from the receipt of an appeal by a licensee of a decision not to renew; hearings on nonrenewals shall be held no earlier than one week from the date an appeal is received, and appellants shall be notified in advance of the date of said hearing. 
(7)  If an alcoholic beverage license is either revoked or nonrenewed under this section, no alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for the same location within a period of one year of the revocation or nonrenewal to the same licensee. The term "same licensee" includes the revoked or nonrenewed licensee's spouse or cohabitant, and any relative of the original licensee within the second degree of consanguinity, which term includes a step, adopted, or foster, parent, sibling, grandparent, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, and first cousin. The term "same licensee" also includes any partner or stockholder of the original licensee's partnership or corporation, or any person who has acquired the original licensee's business other than through a bona fide sale. The burden is upon the new owner to prove that the sale of the business is bona fide. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 99-92, §§ 14, 15, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 00-10, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 9, 13, 21, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 04-1, § 9, 1-6-04; Ord. No. 06-31, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09) 
Sec. 3-12. - Regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises—Generally. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions which have been scheduled in advance may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to private clubs hereunder nor to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person except a wholesaler to carry into premises licensed for mixed drinks or to have in his possession on any premises licensed for mixed drinks any alcoholic beverage in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened; provided, however, the trade and convention center and civic center may grant exceptions to the provisions hereof where such grant of exception is made in writing. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Licensees shall not permit the sale of liquors by the bottle or package, but wines or malt beverages may be sold by the bottle for on-premises consumption. 
(f)  Licensees are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of three hours immediately following 11:55 p.m. on Saturdays; on Tuesday through Saturday licensees shall not sell and businesses shall not allow alcoholic beverages to be brought or consumed on the premises between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and on Mondays licensees shall not allow alcoholic beverages to be sold or brought on the premises between 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m.; but whenever New Year's Day does not fall on Sunday licensees are allowed to sell alcoholic beverages until 4:00 a.m. on New Year's Day; no customer shall be permitted to remain on the premises for more than 20 minutes after the close of sales. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the operation of a bowling center during the prohibited hours so long as alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or consumed during the prohibited hours. 
(g)  It shall be illegal for licensees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(h)  All licensees, except clubs, shall maintain their current prices of mixed drinks and alcoholic beverages, the amount of liquor to be served in each drink, and minimum, admission and cover charges and the same shall be made available at the request of any law enforcement officer. 
(i)  All on-premises alcoholic beverage licensees may sell any alcoholic beverage covered by their on-premises license outside of the licensed premises for catering services to conventions, conferences, sales meetings, seminars, banquet groups, cultural events, private parties or other events where the sale of alcoholic beverages is allowed with written permission from the city manager. An additional rental fee of ten percent of the gross receipts received by the caterer shall be paid by the caterer to the Revenue Division of Columbus, Georgia for events held on any public right-of-way. 
(j)  No person shall hold a license hereunder who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. No financial aid or assistance to any licensee hereunder from any wholesaler or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted. 
(k)  The management of on-premises businesses shall maintain a copy of this section on such premises and shall instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. 
(l)  Patios and decks shall be connected to the primary building of the licensed premises. They shall be bordered by a fence or enclosure no less than three feet high with access gained only through the interior area of the primary building. Nothing contained herein shall be read to limit compliance with the fire code. 
(Ord. No. 78-117, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 80-106, § 1, 8-26-80; Ord. No. 80-147, § 1, 12-23-80; Ord. No. 81-146, § 2, 12-22-81; Ord. No. 85-80, 7-9-85; Ord. No. 86-39, § 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 95-99, §§ 13-20, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 99-92, § 16, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 18—20, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 04-1, § 10, 1-6-04; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 11-58, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Sec. 3-12.1. - Same—"Happy" hours; jumbo drinks, two-for-one; etc. 
All on-premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(a)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(b)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(c)  Selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages after 9:00 p.m. at "Happy Hour" or a price lower than the normal retail cost. 
(d)  Offering free drinks or reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises such as a "Ladies' Night" or "Men's Night." 
(e)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price. 
(f)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price shall not be reduced; for the purposes of this subparagraph, a jumbo drink is defined as any drink containing more than 1½ ounces of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 84-121, § 1, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 3-13. - Same—Sunday hours of sale in eating establishments. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages is hereby authorized for consumption on-premises in eating establishments on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. For the purposes of this section, "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines, and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and the beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(Ord. No. 81-80, § 1, 8-4-81) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 81-80, enacted Aug. 4, 1981, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 3-13 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-13.1. - Same—Persons under minimum drinking age prohibited. 
(a)  All on-premises beer and wine licensees and all on-premises mixed drinks licensees are prohibited, during regular business hours, from admitting persons under the minimum legal drinking age as established in O.C.G.A., § 3-3-23, unless otherwise authorized by ordinance or law, and are prohibited from applying for separate licenses to set up nonalcoholic teen days and businesses on their premises. Licensees covered by the provisions of subsection (a) shall post at or near all entrances in plain view of customers a prominent sign reciting verbatim the prohibition contained in the first sentence of subsection (a). 
(b)  When a licensee operates a bar/pub, night club or an adult oriented establishment on the premises of or in conjunction with the operation of a hotel/motel, such bar/pub, night club or adult oriented establishment shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit persons under the minimum drinking age from entering restaurants as defined in 3-1(f), or from entering a club as defined in 3-1(h) or from entering a riverboat as defined in section 3-1(m), or entering a multi-purpose theater as defined in section 3-1(n), or entering a bowling center as defined in section 3-1(o), or entering a multi-purpose facility as defined in 3-1(v), or entering a municipal golf course as defined in 3-1(w), or entering a municipal sports facility as defined in 3-1(x), or entering a dinner theater as defined in 3-1(aa). 
(d)  The purpose of this Code section is to prohibit the presence of persons under the legal drinking age in establishments which derive the major source of their revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages, but it shall not apply to any employee of the licensee who has a valid employee identification card. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for persons under the minimum legal drinking age as established in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 to enter the premises of any on-premises beer and wine licensee or any on-premises mixed drinks licensee unless otherwise authorized by ordinance or law. Licensees covered by the provisions of subsection (e) shall post at or near all entrances in plain view of customers a prominent sign reciting verbatim the prohibition contained in the first sentence of subsection (e). 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for persons under the age of legal majority as defined in O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1 to be employed by or to perform on the premises of any on-premises beer and wine licensee or any on-premises mixed drinks licensee, provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to a restaurant as defined in section 3-1(f) or a club as defined in section 3-1(h) or a riverboat as defined in section 3-1(m). 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity or use any false identification for the purpose of gaining admission to the premises of any on-premises beer and wine licensee or any on-premises mixed drinks licensee. 
(Ord. No. 86-39, § 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 90-47, 5-29-90; Ord. No. 95-33, §§ 2, 3, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 95-39, § 2, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 95-45, § 2, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 95-99, §§ 21—24, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 96-3, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 99-92, §§ 17, 18, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 00-26, §§ 10, 11, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 3-13.2. - Authorization for Sunday sales of alcohol off-premises by retailers between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 12-3 and O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(q) and pursuant to referendum passed on November 6, 2012 in Muscogee County, Georgia, package sales of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits by retailers on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. are hereby authorized. Such sales by retailers may commence on Sunday December 2, 2012 between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 12-51, § 1, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 3-14. - Sales on election days. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247) approved April 10, 1985, Georgia Laws 1985, Volume I, pages 1508-1510, amending O.C.G.A., § 3-3-20, the wholesale sale and the off-premises and on-premises retail sale of alcoholic beverages, to wit, liquors, wines and malt beverages, is permitted during any election or referendum on the election day including the hours that the polling places are open; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. 82-1, § 1, 1-12-82; Ord. No. 85-101, § 1, 9-3-85) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 82-1, enacted Jan. 12, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 3-14 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-15. - Open containers of alcoholic beverages, consuming alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages or to have in his or her possession any open container or package of alcoholic beverages while aboard any motor vehicle operated or parked on any public street or public property or on any private property open to public access or vehicular traffic unless such person is a passenger in a motor vehicle driven by a hired chauffeur or other driver which is licensed by the city to operate a motor vehicle for hire or is a passenger aboard a chartered carrier or a carrier wherein the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed by law or unless such open container or package is in the trunk of the motor vehicle or kept in a locked glove compartment or in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers; a container or package shall be deemed open when the original seal is broken, and any receptacle with an open top or with a straw shall be classified as an open container or package. 
(Ord. No. 89-113, 10-24-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-113, adopted Oct. 24, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion as § 3-15 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-16. - "Brown-bagging" prohibited. 
(a)  No business shall permit persons, other than alcoholic beverage wholesalers or licensed caterers, to carry or bring alcoholic beverages onto its premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), licensees holding a valid brown-bagging permit as of November 1, 2003 shall be entitled to renew such permit by April 1 of each year, but such permits shall not be transferable to any other licensee, person, or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-99, § 25, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 95-103, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 04-1, § 11, 1-6-04) 
Sec. 3-17.1 - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages in bowling centers. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in any bowling center between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays is hereby authorized. The Sunday consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a bowling center shall be restricted to areas where meals are prepared or where bowling lanes are rented and shall not be permitted in other areas of the bowling center. 
(Ord. No. 99-87, § 2, 12-7-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-15, § 5, adopted April 22, 2014, renumbered section 3-17 as section 3-17.1 
Sec. 3-17.2 - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with more than 2,500 seats. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in any public stadium, coliseum or auditorium owned or controlled by the city or a public authority between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays is hereby authorized. The city may license a designated beverage concessionaire to provide such sales. 
(Ord. No. 14-15, § 5, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 3-18. - Adult oriented establishment regulations. 
(a)  An adult oriented establishment may only be open between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 2:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. On Saturday, hours of operation shall be 4:00 p.m. until Sunday morning at 2:55 a.m. 
(b)  All dancers shall perform on a platform or stage intended for that purpose. The platform or stage shall be at least 24 inches higher than the floor. No dancer shall be allowed to touch, fondle or caress or otherwise touch any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress or otherwise touch any dancer at any time. No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from a patron. No dancer may solicit patrons to purchase any item for sale at the business where they perform. All areas of an adult oriented establishment must be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot of floor space. 
(c)  No dancing, modeling or other entertainment shall be allowed in private settings or locations. All dancing, modeling or other entertainment shall be in the public area licensed for the activity in view of everyone in the establishment. Additionally no business licensed under the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92) may have private rooms where illegal activities could take place or be permitted. Locks shall be permitted on offices, store rooms or dressing rooms. The public shall not be permitted in these locked areas. 
(d)  Each licensed adult oriented establishment under the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92) shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. Adequate supplies and equipment shall be on premises to meet this requirement. The exterior of the premises must be kept in a clean condition. Trash, garbage or litter shall not be allowed to accumulate and become a burden to the community. 
(e)  Each dancer must perform only as they are employed. They cannot double or assist as waiters or waitresses. No dancer can perform other jobs or duties unless they have left employment as a dancer after at least 30 calendar days. No waiter or waitress can perform as a dancer unless they have left employment as a waiter or waitress for at least 30 days. 
(f)  Totally nude dancing, appearing nude or dancing involving acts of public indecency as defined by the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92) are hereby prohibited. Additionally, any owner, manager, operator or other responsible person that allows a person to dance totally nude or dance and commit acts of public indecency shall be guilty under the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92). 
Any other dancing acts or public indecency prohibited by other applicable laws of the State of Georgia, or the City of Columbus as now or hereafter enacted, or the violation of the other criminal laws of the State of Georgia or the City of Columbus, are likewise prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-92, § 19, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-19. - Violations and penalty. 
No licensee of an establishment that has adult entertainment shall allow and no employee thereof shall engage in any activity that violates any section of the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92). Any person violating the provisions of the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92) shall be guilty of a city ordinance violation, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code, or by both fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine and imprisonment, any violation of the ordinance from which this section derives (Ordinance No. 99-92) shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of all licenses by the Columbus Council under the procedures contained in Columbus Code section 3-11. Upon the license of any on premise adult oriented establishment being revoked by council, the license shall be surrendered to the issuing authority. No license will be issued at the location to any other on premise adult oriented establishment. 
(Ord. No. 99-92, § 20, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-20. - Administrative rules. 
(a)  Audit procedures: All businesses under this chapter, whether for profit or not, shall be subject to an audit to determine taxes and eligibility of conditions set forth in this Code. 
(1)  Prior to an audit, the City of Columbus shall notify licensee, in writing, of intent to audit business. Upon written request of records, licensee shall make available all records pertinent to audit within 30 days of request. 
(2)  Any business that has been issued a conditional license as defined in section 3-5 shall submit to an audit of the premises and records to determine that the business is in compliance with the requirements of the Code within 120 days of license issuance. The licensee, or his representative shall be advised of audit results within ten business days of completion of audit. 
(3)  Any business which fails to comply with the conditions of a license set forth by the Code shall be subject to revocation within 45 days of completion of audit, except where the license will expire within 45 days. 
(b)  Alcohol beverage license issuance: No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued until the licensee has complied with all laws, ordinances, and rules set forth by agencies, whether state, local, or federal, regulating the business, as being evidenced by documentation issued by such agencies. No alcoholic beverage shall be issued until the issuing authority is satisfied that the business is in compliance with Chapter 3 of the Code. 
(c)  At any time, any agent of the city may enter upon the licensed premises covered under this chapter for the purpose of inspecting the premises, books and records, and supplies relating to the possession of alcoholic beverages for compliance with city and state law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity to manufacture, distribute, sell, handle, possess for sale, or otherwise deal in or transport for sale, any alcoholic beverage without a valid alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 00-26, § 12, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 11-59, § 1, 11-8-11) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Prohibition against skating in roadways, see § 18-24; as to skating on sidewalks, see § 18-25; for prohibition against sale of intoxicating beverages in recreation areas, § 3-10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Sales of tickets to public events; soliciting for or sale of at excessive prices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or walk upon any sidewalk or street; in front of or near a store or place of business of any kind, in or near Memorial Stadium, Golden Park, the Municipal Auditorium and Three Arts Theatre, public golf courses and tennis centers; or any other public place or property for the purpose of soliciting sales or of actually selling tickets to any public event held or to be held in Columbus, Georgia at a price or prices greater than the price which has been previously established for the sale of tickets to such event. 
(Ord. No. 78-65, § 4, 5-23-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed § 4-1 relative to public solicitation of sales of tickets to athletic events. Said section was derived from Ord. of Nov. 8, 1955, § 1. Section 4 of said Ord. No. 78-65 added a new § 4-1. 
Sec. 4-1.1. - Registration fees for adult athletic teams. 
A registration fee of $25.00 shall be imposed on adult athletic teams, softball, basketball, volleyball, football and any other adult athletic team organized by the city parks and recreation department, effective July 1, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 92-37, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 4-2. - Public parks and playgrounds—General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any of the public parks of Columbus, Georgia contrary to the rules and regulations established for the use thereof. When special areas have been set aside in the various parks and public places for specified activities, the activities designated shall be confined to those areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motordriven vehicle or motorcycle or bicycle through a park unless there is a road or pathway clearly marked for such use. In particular, a vehicular or motor traffic shall be limited to clearly designated roadways. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any fountains, fences, benches, or other park property or to break, injure or destroy any flowers, shrubs or trees growing in the parks or to injure, maim or kill any wildlife located therein. Fishing in certain designated public lakes may be permitted. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to enter or remain in any public park or playground of Columbus, Georgia between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except for those activities supervised or scheduled by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 78-65, § 4, 5-23-78) 
Editor's note— Former § 4-2, relative to sale of tickets to athletic events at excessive prices, has been deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 78-65, § 4, enacted May 23, 1978. See § 4-2 above. Section 4 of said Ord. No. 78-65 also enacted provisions designated §§ 4-2 and 4-3 reading as herein set out. 
Sec. 4-2.1. - Same—Use of Lakebottom and Weracoba Park track. 
The crushed stone jogging and walking track which encompasses Lakebottom Park and Weracoba Park bounded by 13th Street, Cherokee Avenue, Garrard Street, 18th Avenue, and 17th Street shall be restricted to foot travel, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven vehicle or motorcycle or bicycle or skates or skateboard on or over the designated crushed stone track. 
(Ord. No. 85-8, 1-29-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-8, enacted Jan. 29, 1985, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as § 4-2.1 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 4-2.2. - Rails-to-trails rules. 
The rails-to-trails pedestrian and biking trail rules are hereby established. The trail rules, which shall be referred to as trail etiquette are as follows: 
(a)  Yield to pedestrians. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way. 
(b)  Trail stops at all public streets. All trail users are required to stop at all public streets. 
(c)  Keep right, pass on the left. The trail is like a roadway. Warn trail users as you approach from behind by announcing yourself by saying "On your left". If you stop, get off the trail. 
(d)  Certain vehicles prohibited. The trail is designed for walking, running, and jogging. Bicycles, skateboards, roller-skates, and roller blades shall be permitted when used in a safe and controlled manner. No electric vehicles with more than two wheels shall be allowed, except for the physically disabled. No gasoline-powered vehicles shall be allowed, except for city authorized vehicles and emergency service vehicles. 
(e)  Maintain safe speed. No person shall operate a bicycle or other permitted vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(f)  Keep animals under control. All pets shall be on a short leash and under the control of the owner. Owners shall clean up after their animals. No horses are allowed on the trail. 
(g)  Trail hours. It shall be unlawful to enter or remain on the trail between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except for those activities supervised or scheduled by the department of parks and recreation. 
(h)  No intoxicants allowed on the trail. No alcoholic beverages or other intoxicants shall be permitted on the trail. 
(i)  Report any problems. In the case of an emergency, dial 911. Report maintenance problems by dialing 311. 
(j)  It is unlawful to litter. Keep the trail clean and deposit trash in containers along the trail. Littering shall be unlawful. 
(k)  All users of trails owned by the consolidated government of Columbus, Georgia assume the risk of bodily injury and shall follow the above-specified rules at all times. 
(l)  Persons violating these rules shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-63, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 4-3. - Penalty for violation. 
The penalty for violation of any of these provisions shall be that provided in section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-65, § 4, 5-23-78) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 4-2. 
Sec. 4-4. - Manner of conducting public dance; penalty. 
(a)  All public dances held in a hall for which a license has been issued, must be conducted in a manner free from behavior calculated to offend a sense of common decency or morality. No known prostitute, or person under the influence of liquor, nor any person acting in an unruly or disorderly manner shall be allowed in or about the hall during such public dances. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to attend such dance unless accompanied by a parent, or proper guardian. Provided however that the public dances which may be attended only by minors, minors under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to attend such dances where the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Attendance must be limited to persons 14 through 18 years of age and in attendance in the 9th through 12th grades of school. 
(2)  There must be in attendance at such teenage dances a minimum of four chaperones, (as herein defined) one of whom shall be female and two of whom shall be off duty policemen. 
(3)  There must be one additional chaperone present for every 50 teenagers in attendance in excess of 100; provided that the sponsor may substitute one off duty policeman for any two chaperones required by the terms of this paragraph. 
(4)  "Chaperones", as used herein, is defined to mean adult persons over the age of 25 years and of good, moral character; their presence to be for the purpose of insuring the wholesome and proper conduct of the function. 
(5)  Minors under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to attend such dances only when permission for attendance is given in writing by the parent or proper guardian, and the burden shall be upon the operator of a public dance to confirm the authenticity of such written consent. 
(b)  Any person operating a public dance in violation of the requirements as set forth herein shall be punished as provided in Section 7, Paragraph 11 of the Charter of the City of Columbus as codified. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner or lessee of such hall for which such license is issued to see that the provisions of this section are obeyed, under penalty of suspension or a revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 4-7-20, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 67-205, § 1, 10-30-67; Ord. No. 67-211, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-67) 
Cross reference— Prohibition against drinking spirituous liquors in eating places or other public places, § 14-5(d). 
Sec. 4-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-21, § 1, adopted March 18, 1975, repealed § 4-5 relating to Sunday operation of theaters, athletic events and games, derived from Ord. of March 29, 1949, § 1. It should be noted that §§ 4-6—4-10 deal with the same or similar subject matter, however such sections were not repealed. 
Sec. 4-6. - Approved sales at high school football, basketball and baseball games at Memorial Stadium and Municipal Auditorium. 
(a)  Items enumerated. It shall be permissible for booster clubs and school-related organizations of high schools participating in any given football, basketball and baseball game held at Memorial Stadium or Municipal Auditorium to sell seat cushions, novelties, and other souvenir items when such clubs and organizations have been approved to do so by the principals of the schools involved. Such sales shall be limited to items as described above and shall not include any food or beverage items. No business license shall be required for such sales, nor shall Columbus, Georgia, receive any percentage of these sales. 
(b)  Location of stands and tables. Clubs and organizations which are approved may locate stands or tables at appropriate locations inside and outside the Memorial Stadium and the Municipal Auditorium. 
(c)  Identification badges. It shall be a prerequisite for workers or volunteers for such approved clubs and organizations to wear identification badges or other forms of identification showing that they have been approved to sell these items by the principals of the high schools participating in games at the time. 
(d)  Penalties. Any persons violating the provisions of this section by conducting unauthorized or unapproved sales shall be punished as provided by section 1-8 of the Columbus, Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 81-88, § 1, 9-8-81) 
Secs. 4-7—4-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 4-6—4-10, relative to Sunday operation of athletic events where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978. Said sections were derived from Ord. of May 7, 1919, § 2, and Ord. of March 29, 1949, §§ 2—5. 
Sec. 4-11. - Circus, carnival, etc.; grounds where permitted; permission required. 
The city manager is authorized to approve the operation of carnivals, circuses or similar shows on property other than the city fairgrounds, subject to compliance with all applicable business license regulations and zoning regulations, including special exception use permits when required, by all applicants for such events. 
(Ord. of 9-7-48, § 1; Ord. No. 71-74, § 1, 3-30-71; Ord. No. 02-29, 3-26-02) 
Sec. 4-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-74, § 2, adopted March 30, 1971, repealed former § 4-12 requiring council permission for the operation of amusements or devices referred to in § 4-11 on lands owned by the city lying south of the south line of Fourth Street. Said section was derived from Ord. of Sept. 7, 1948, § 3. 
Sec. 4-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-105, adopted Oct. 25, 1988, repealed former § 4-13 in its entirety. Such former section pertained to amusements, etc., on fair grounds, and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 7, 1948, § 2. 
Sec. 4-14. - Viewing entertainment from outside grounds. 
When any game, exhibition or entertainment is in progress in the city where an admission fee is charged, it shall be unlawful for any person to view such game, exhibition or entertainment from outside of the enclosure within which such game is played or exhibition or entertainment had by standing or sitting on the hood, top, or fender of an automobile or by standing or sitting on the fence of such enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 7-8-47, § 2) 
Secs. 4-15—4-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, enacted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 4-15—4-25, relative to seat cushions at Municipal Stadium, attaching placards to poles during "Columbus Days," and pertaining to the Memorial Stadium Commission. Said sections were derived from Ord. of March 2, 1937, §§ 1—7; Ord. No. Aug. 21, 1939, § 1; and Ord. of Nov. 19, 1940, §§ 1—3. 
Sec. 4-25.1. - Fishing from bridges prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to fish from the motor vehicle roadway of any bridge across the Chattahoochee River or any stream in Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 74-103, § 1, 6-11-74) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74-103, § 1, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 4-25.1 was at the discretion of the editors. Section 2 of said ordinance, setting forth penalty provisions substantially the same as provided in § 1-8, was omitted from codification. 
Sec. 4-25.2. - Municipal auditorium—Leasing; use conditions. 
(a)  In the public interest the director of the department of parks and recreation is hereby authorized, conditioned upon the prior approval of the council, to lease the Columbus Municipal Auditorium for periods of up to one year on behalf of Columbus, Georgia to persons, firms or corporations who agree to use said auditorium for at least 18 separate events of the same kind, type and character during the year or the lease period, whichever is the lesser. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Said lease agreement may provide for an option of renewal by consent of the parties each year. 
(Ord. No. 75-34, § 1, 4-22-75; Ord. No. 85-11, 2-5-85) 
Editor's note— Section 4-25.2 is derived from Ord. No. 75-34, § 1, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code. 
Secs. 4-25.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-26, adopted April 1, 1997, repealed § 4-25.3 of the Code, which prohibited smoking in certain areas of the municipal auditorium and derived from Ord. No. 81-23, §§ 1—4, adopted April 1, 1997. A no-smoking policy for all city-owned buildings currently exists as § 13.01 of the Code. 
Sec. 4-26. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter or any part or section thereof, shall, upon conviction before the recorder, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-8-55, § 3) 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, Ord. No. 80-90, adopted July 22, 1980, which did not specifically amend this Code, is included in Ch. 4. Designation of §§ 1—5 of said ordinance as Art. II, §§ 4-27—4-31, is at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 4-27. - Board recreated. 
There is hereby recreated the recreation advisory board formerly established by the Charter of Columbus, Georgia, which is hereby continued in existence. 
(Ord. No. 80-90, § 1, 7-22-80) 
Sec. 4-28. - Continuity of operations. 
The board shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-90, § 2, 7-22-80) 
Sec. 4-29. - Operation generally. 
The board shall consist of 11 members. One member shall be appointed from each Columbus council district by the councilor representing said district and each of the two at-large councilors shall appoint one member to serve at large. Terms of office shall be four years. The eleventh voting member shall be the Athletic Director of the Muscogee County School District serving in an ex-officio capacity 
(Ord. No. 80-90, § 3, 7-22-80; Ord. No. 92-10, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 00-42, § 1, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 18-32, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 4-30. - Board to serve in advisory capacity to director of parks and recreation. 
The recreation advisory board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the director of the parks and recreation department for the consideration of policies of the department and make recommendations for its operation and the advancement of recreational programs and facilities throughout the community. 
(Ord. No. 80-90, § 4, 7-22-80) 
Sec. 4-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-32, § 2, adopted June 12, 2018, repealed § 4-31, which pertained to school board athletic and recreation council member to serve on board and derived from Ord. No. 80-90, § 5, July 22, 1980. 
Sec. 4-32. - Board duties. 
(a)  The recreation advisory board shall perform duties including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The board shall meet at least bimonthly (six times per year) with the Director of Parks and Recreation and shall elect a chairperson to preside at its meetings; 
(2)  The board shall prepare minutes of its meetings with assistance from parks and recreation personnel and shall transmit a copy of the same to the mayor, council, city manager and clerk of council; 
(3)  The board shall provide written recommendations to the mayor, council, city manager and clerk of council when deemed necessary by the board concerning the operations and programs of the city department of parks and recreation; 
(4)  The board shall review financial statements of the parks and recreation department with a representative from the finance department at least on a quarterly basis; 
(5)  The board shall inspect and conduct site visits to each facility of the city department of parks and recreation at least once per year; 
(6)  The board shall review the city department of parks and recreation policies and procedures at least once per year and make any recommendations for amendments as deemed necessary by the board; 
(7)  The board shall assist the crime prevention director and public safety agencies with coordination of programs directed at crime prevention and community education; and 
(8)  Perform any other activities or duties as requested by the Columbus Council. 
(b)  The seat of any member of the recreation advisory board shall be declared vacant if such member misses three consecutive meetings. Any board vacancy shall be filled as provided in section 4-29 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-63, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 19-008, § 1, 2-26-19) 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS 

Secs. 4-33—4-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted May 23, 1978, repealed §§ 4-33—4-41 relative to parks generally and relative to Court House Park and Exposition Park specifically. Said sections were derived from Code 1914, §§ 711—715, 720, 721, 778, 784. 
Sec. 4-41.1. - Hours of use. 
It shall be unlawful to enter or remain in any public park or playground of Columbus, Georgia between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except for those activities supervised or scheduled by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 74-104, § 1, 6-11-74) 
Editor's note— Section 4-41.1 is derived from Ord. No. 74-104, § 1, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code. Section 2 of said ordinance, containing penalty provisions substantially the same as specified in § 1-8, has been omitted from codification. 
Sec. 4-42. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall be guilty of any violation of this article or who in any manner shall so act as to annoy the frequenters of the parks or injure any of the property or grounds belonging thereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1914, § 719) 
Secs. 4-43—4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COLUMBUS AQUATICS COMMISSION 

Sec. 4-61. - Goal. 
The goal of the Columbus Aquatics Commission is to enhance and improve the services offered at the Columbus Aquatics Center and the Double Churches Pool supervised and operated by the city department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 16-8, § 1, 4-26-16) 
Sec. 4-62. - Composition. 
(a)  There shall be a Columbus Aquatics Commission that shall be composed of seven members, including the chairperson. Each member shall be appointed by the Columbus Council. Terms of office for a member of the commission shall be initially staggered at one year for three members and two years for the other four members. Thereafter, members shall serve two-year terms. 
(b)  One of the commission members shall be recommended to the Columbus Council from the membership or board of the Columbus Hurricanes organization. 
(c)  In addition to forgoing voting members, the Athletic Director of the Muscogee County School District shall serve on the commission as an ex-officio non-voting member. 
(Ord. No. 16-8, § 1, 4-26-16; Ord. No. 18-33, § 1, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 4-63. - Duties. 
(a)  The Columbus Aquatics Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the director of the Department of Parks and Recreation and the Columbus Council and shall make recommendations to the Director and Council concerning operations and programming at the Columbus Aquatics Center and the Double Churches Pool operated by parks and recreation. 
(b)  The Commission shall: 
(1)  Meet bimonthly (six times per year) with the Director of Parks and Recreation and shall elect a chairperson to preside at its meetings. 
(2)  Prepare minutes of its meetings with assistance from Parks and Recreation personnel and shall transmit a copy of the same to the mayor, council, city manager and clerk of council. 
(3)  Provide written recommendations to the mayor, council, city manager and clerk of council when deemed necessary by the Commission concerning the operations and programs of the Columbus Aquatics Center and Double Churches Pool operated by the Department of Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall ensure that the commission participates in the process for hiring management and staff for the Columbus Aquatics Center. 
(4)  Review financial statements of the Parks and Recreation department with a representative from the finance department at least on a monthly basis. 
(5)  Inspect and conduct site visits to the Columbus Aquatics Center and Double Churches Pool operated by the department of Parks and Recreation at least once per year. 
(6)  Review the city department of Parks and Recreation policies and procedures at least once per year and make any needed recommendations related to pool and aquatics operations. 
(7)  Perform any other activities or duties as requested by the Columbus Council. 
(Ord. No. 16-8, § 1, 4-26-16; Ord. No. 19-001, § 1, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 4-64. - Vacancy. 
The seat of any member of the Columbus Aquatics Commission shall be declared vacant if such member misses three consecutive meetings. Any commission vacancy shall be filled as provided in section 4-62 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-8, § 1, 4-26-16) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 84-91, enacted Oct. 2, 1984, repealed former Ch. 5 in its entirety and enacted, in lieu thereof, a new Ch. 5 as herein set forth. Former Ch. 5, which also pertained to animals and fowl, and derived from amendment of 8-15-33 and subsequent amendatory ordinances. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Animal Control and Enforcement Ordinance of Columbus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-2. - Authority and enforcement, generally. 
(a)  Statutory authority . The general authority for this chapter is O.C.G.A Title 4, chapters 8 and 11 as amended, which require governing authorities of each county and municipality to regulate dangerous and vicious dogs and license certain animals in the interest of rabies control. 
(b)  Animal control and enforcement division. Ordinance No. 84-62, adopted by the Council of Columbus on June 21, 1984, established the animal control and enforcement division as an "enterprise activity" under the operational control of the Director of Public Services of the Consolidated Government of Columbus. 
(c)  Enforcement. The chief of the animal control and enforcement division and the duly sworn animal control officers are hereby charged with primary responsibility and are hereby empowered with the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 15-33, § 1, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-2.1. - Training for enforcement officers. 
All enforcement officers assigned to duties under the animal control chapter shall undergo a period of training in which they shall familiarize themselves with the provisions of this chapter and the fundamental requirements of such constitutional protections as probable cause in order to ensure that the rights of private citizens shall be guaranteed during the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-3. - Animal control advisory board. 
(a)  Established. An animal control advisory board is hereby established to be effective October 16, 1984. 
(b)  Mission. The animal control advisory board shall monitor the operation of the animal control and enforcement division and render such guidance and assistance as is deemed appropriate in order to "encourage responsible pet ownership." Proposals and recommendations shall normally be presented during the periodic board meetings. Matters that need immediate attention should be referred to the chief of the animal control and enforcement division, or to the director of the department of public services. 
(c)  Composition of board. The board shall have nine voting members and one nonvoting member to be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Two licensed veterinarians practicing in Columbus who are participating in the "one-stop pet registration-rabies vaccination program" shall serve as voting members. The board members are to be selected by the local veterinary association as a representative of the association, and the selections shall be confirmed by the Columbus Council. Notwithstanding the provisions of Columbus Code Section 2-3.02, the veterinarians need not be a resident of Columbus provided that they have a practice at an office located within Columbus and have all required State of Georgia and Columbus professional and business licenses. The veterinarians shall be appointed for two-year terms, except the initial appointments when one veterinarian shall be appointed to a one-year term and one veterinarian shall be appointed to serve a two-year term. The veterinarian appointees shall be eligible to succeed themselves. 
(2)  A designated representative of PAWS Columbus, Inc. confirmed by the Columbus Council shall serve as a voting member. The PAWS Columbus Board Member shall be appointed to serve a two-year term, and may only serve two terms consecutively. 
(3)  A representative of an animal rescue operating a licensed shelter in Muscogee County shall serve as a voting member. The appointment shall be recommended by the animal rescue and then nominated and confirmed by the Columbus Council. The animal rescue board member shall be appointed to serve a two-year term, and may only serve two terms consecutively. 
(4)  Five citizens to be selected by the Columbus Council shall serve as voting members. The citizen members shall be appointed to serve two-year terms, except for the initial appointments upon adoption of this chapter, one citizen shall be appointed to a one-year term and one citizen shall be appointed to a two-year term. The citizen board members may only serve two terms consecutively. 
(5)  An employee of the Environmental Health Division, Columbus Department of Public Health shall serve as a nonvoting member of the board. The board member is to be appointed by the county board of health and confirmed by the Columbus Council. 
(6)  The director of public works shall be a nonvoting ex-officio member of the board. 
(7)  The chief of animal control and enforcement shall be a nonvoting ex-officio member of the board. 
(8)  The administrative officer of the animal control and enforcement division shall be the recording secretary for the board. 
(d)  Schedule of board meetings. The board shall meet at a time and place designated by the board chairman. The chairman is authorized to adjust the schedule, except that the board is required to meet at least semiannually. 
(e)  In any event, any member shall abstain from voting upon any issues which touch or bear upon matters in which the member has a pecuniary interest, either proprietorship, salary, or otherwise. In any matter called for a vote in which any member abstains, a failure to win a majority shall constitute a defeat of that issue. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-3, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, §§ 1—3, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 86-115, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 04-65, § 1, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 15-16, § 1, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 18-11, § 1, 4-10-18; Ord. No. 18-18, § 1, 5-29-18) 
Sec. 5-4. - Funding. 
(a)  Ordinance No. 84-62 established the animal control and enforcement division. All funds generated pursuant to enforcement of this chapter, such as sale of animal permits, penalties and impoundment fees, and penalties from court fines shall be remitted to the city treasurer to be credited to the general fund. 
(b)  The chief of the animal control and enforcement division shall prepare an annual budget in accordance with policies and procedures of the budget officer. The budget shall be reviewed by the animal control advisory board and submitted to the director of the department of public services who will forward the budget with recommendations through the budget officer to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-4, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, §§ 4—6, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 5-5. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined in this section, all words in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include future tense. 
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The words "shall, will and required" always mean mandatory. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
(1)  Owner shall mean any natural person or legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning or having an interest in, permanently harboring or keeping, or having long-term custody or control of a dog or cat, or the head of household who has furnished or permitted a member of that household to so harbor, keep or have long-term custody of a dog or cat. Kennel keepers, veterinarians, professional groomers, pet shop owners, or similar entrepreneurs who keep dogs or cats as inventory or professionally render services thereto are not considered owners within the scope of this article if acting in such a capacity. Community cat colony caretakers, as defined in paragraph (25), shall not be considered owners for the purposes of this chapter. 
(2)  Private/hobby kennel. A lot, establishment, residence, or premise or portion thereof where six or more dogs and/or cats combined total, over six months of age, are boarded or kept for any purpose whatsoever, including as personal or family pets, for recreational use, for exhibition and where breeding and sale of offspring is not the primary function. Veterinary hospitals or clinics are exempted. 
(3)  Commercial kennel. A kennel, or retail or wholesale activity, maintained for the purpose of offering any service whatsoever, including but not limited to boarding, grooming, breeding, keeping for sale, selling, trading, training, renting, or leasing for guard purposes any dogs or other animals. Veterinary hospitals or clinics are excluded. 
(4)  Fences shall mean a fenced enclosure constructed with sufficient height, strength, and secure closing devices to adequately secure the dog or dogs being contained therein. 
(5)  He/him shall mean masculine or feminine and singular or plural. 
(6)  Dangerous dog shall mean any dog defined as dangerous by O.C.G.A § 5-8-21(a)(2). 
(7)  Vicious dog shall mean any dog defined as vicious by the O.C.G.A § 5-8-21(a)(6). 
(8)  Proper enclosure shall mean an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or cat, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog [or cat] from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(9)  One-stop rabies vaccination—Pet registration shall mean the chief of the animal control and enforcement division may authorize any veterinarian or veterinary clinic licensed to practice veterinary medicine in Columbus, Georgia, to act as an agent and issue animal registration permits. 
(10)  Annual pet registration shall mean the registration is valid from January 1 through December 31 of the year in which issued. 
(11)  Anniversary registration shall mean a pet registration period in concurrence with the term of the rabies vaccination. (A new registration permit is required on or before the expiration date of the rabies vaccination.) 
(12)  Three-year registration shall mean when a three-year rabies vaccination is given to an animal a three-year registration permit is authorized upon payment of the three-year permit fee and such permit shall expire on the expiration of the rabies vaccination. 
(13)  Responsible pet ownership shall mean: 
(a)  Care of a pet in such a manner as to provide humane living conditions for the pet; 
(b)  Control of the pet so that the pet does not cause a nuisance or unsanitary conditions for the neighborhood or community; 
(c)  Such a pet would have current rabies and city registration tags. 
(14)  Unattended shall mean any dog on the owner's property and not confined thereto by fence, chain, or other suitable and effective means, and when no responsible person is available to control such dog if said dog has been observed on public property or private property other than property of the owner, and not in voice control of a responsible person, by an enforcement officer at Columbus, Georgia, or by a complaint willing to testify in court. 
(15)  Probable cause shall mean that prior to going onto private property, animal control enforcement officers must have knowledge of facts or circumstances that would make a prudent or reasonable person believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring. 
(16)  Birds shall mean any animal belonging to a class of warmblooded vertebrates with wings and feathers. 
(17)  Fowl shall mean domestic poultry which are normally propagated and fattened for the table or for their eggs, feathers, etc., such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, and guinea fowls. 
(18)  Severe injury shall mean any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
(19)  Dog control officer shall mean the senior animal control officer who is designated to fulfill the duties as outlined in this chapter. 
(20)  Tethering shall mean the act of fastening or restraining a dog outside of the presence of its owner or caregiver by a mechanism appropriate to the circumstances and set forth in this chapter. 
(21)  Caretaker shall mean any person entrusted with the short term responsibility for a domesticated animal. If an owner gives short term responsibility for an animal to a minor, the owner remains responsible for any liability in connection with the animal. 
(22)  Feral cat means a cat, regardless of sex or age, lacking owner identification, free-roaming, and appearing unsocialized. 
(23)  Community cat means a feral cat that has been trapped, sterilized, vaccinated, and ear tipped. 
(24)  Ear tipping means straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat while the cat is appropriately anesthetized. A cat that has been ear tipped is presumed to be sterile, vaccinated against rabies, and a community cat. 
(25)  Community cat rescue means a non-profit rescue organization licensed in accordance with the laws of Georgia which has been designated by Columbus Animal Care and Control as the organization(s) responsible for administering and keeping all required records for the community cat program. 
(26)  Community cat colony means an identified group consisting of more than five feral cats that have been or will be neutered or spayed, vaccinated, ear tipped and released back into the area from which they were taken. 
(27)  Community cat colony caretaker means a person who has identified his or herself to Columbus Animal Care and Control or its designated community cat rescue and has identified a community cat colony for which he or she is willing to provide sustenance, water and care for that community cat colony. 
(28)  Community cat program means a collaborative program involving Columbus Animal Control and such community cat rescues as they may designate, wherein feral cats are trapped, neutered, vaccinated and ear-tipped to become community cats to be managed and provided for in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Code Sections 5-20 through 5-23 below in accordance with policies and procedures developed by the special enforcement division manager with approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-5, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 85-118, § 2, 10-15-85; Ord. No. 86-34, § 7, 5-8-86; Ord. No. 87-106, § 1, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 89-123, § 1, 11-21-89; Ord. No. 97-69, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 04-65, § 2, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 13-12, § I, 3-12-13; Ord. No. 15-33, § 2, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 5-6. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The penalty for violation of any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be in accordance with section 1-8 of the Columbus Code of Ordinances. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The Columbus Health Department, the Columbus Police Department, and the business license department are authorized and directed to cooperate in the enforcement of provisions of this chapter appropriately requiring action and investigation by their respective departments. 
(c)  Animal control officers, officers of the Columbus Police Department, officials of the business license department, and other law enforcement officers shall investigate violations of this chapter and shall secure all evidence and issue summons to defendants and witnesses for appearance in recorders' court in order that the recorders' court judge may be furnished with all essential and available facts upon trial of offenses under this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to resist, interfere with, hinder or molest any officer or agent of the animal control and enforcement division or any other persons charged with enforcement of any provision of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to attempt to release any animal captured or impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Tampering with traps or other capture devices utilized by the animal control officers is prohibited. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to attempt to bribe, coerce, or otherwise influence an animal control enforcement officer who is investigating an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter. Officers subject to such attempts to influence their lawful investigations shall secure all evidence and issue summons to defendants and witness for appearance in recorders' court in order that the judge of recorders' court may rule on the case as provided for in the Columbus Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Prior to going onto private property, animal control enforcement officers must have knowledge of facts or circumstances that would make a prudent or reasonable person believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring. The authority vested in an animal control enforcement officer shall not be construed to provide said enforcement officer with the authority to enter a private building or dwelling house for any reason, unless permission is given by said owner of said property. Under no circumstances will the authority vested in an animal control enforcement officer include the right of said enforcement officer to infringe on the rights and liberties of any citizen or to carry out any action contrary to any provision of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(h)  Authority to shoot animals: In the event any animal subject to being impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter cannot be captured without actual danger to the officer, or public, designated officers of animal control and enforcement division, or the police department of Columbus, Georgia, are authorized to shoot such an animal when shooting can be done without endangering persons or property. In such cases that may necessitate shooting an animal suspected of having rabies, the person shooting the animal shall avoid damage to the head of the animal so as not to interfere with laboratory examination of the brain to determine rabies infection. 
(i)  Killing of animals prohibited: No person shall kill or cause to be killed any animal suspected of being rabid or any animal that has bitten a human, except as herein provided, nor shall any person remove such animals from Columbus, Georgia, without permission of the director of Columbus Department of Public Health or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-6, 10-2-84) 
ARTICLE II. - DOMESTICATED ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-7. - Owner responsibility. 
The owner (as defined by section 5-5) shall be held responsible for the actions of all domesticated animals under his or her ownership, custody, supervision, or control. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-7, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-7.1. - Outdoor facilities. 
An owner or caretaker of a dog who allows the dog to spend more than eight hours in a 24-hour period outside must provide the dog an outdoor facility that meets the following specifications: 
(a)  Outdoor facilities for dogs shall include one or more shelters that are accessible to each dog and one or more separate outside areas of shade that is large enough to contain all the dogs at one time to protect them from the direct rays of the sun. Outdoor facilities shall be kept neat and free of clutter, including equipment, furniture and stored materials as well as accumulated trash, waste, junk, weeds and other discarded materials. 
(b)  Outdoor shelters shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Include a roof, four sides and a floor; 
(2)  Be of sufficient size to allow each dog in the outdoor facility to sit, stand, lie in the fully stretched position, and to turn about freely; 
(3)  Provide an environment that will protect from the elements when the ambient temperature is below 50 degrees Fahrenheit or below ten degrees Celsius; 
(4)  Be constructed of materials that are impervious to moisture and easily cleaned and sanitized; 
(5)  Be structurally sound and kept in good repair, with no missing boards, jagged edges or excessive rust; 
(6)  Be cleaned weekly on all hard surfaces with which the dogs come into contact; 
(7)  Be free of accumulated trash, waste, junk, weeds and other discarded materials; and 
(8)  Crates or barrels are not acceptable outdoor shelters, and carports are not acceptable as the sole means of shelter available to the dog. 
(c)  All outdoor areas to which a dog has access shall be kept clean and free of fecal matter and all other trash and waste. 
(Ord. No. 04-65, § 3, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 5-7.2. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog to fail to keep the dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. If a canine pulley system is being used, the animal must stay within the owner's property line and not have the ability to get caught up or hung due to the location of other tangible materials that could hinder the animal(s) from freely moving within the confines of the system; 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on all entry points or identified entry points of the property indicating that the system is in place; 
(3)  It is housed on a lot zoned R-5 or R-10 of at least five acres in size and remains within the confines of its owners property in accordance with the provisions of 5-10(a); or 
(4)  It is on a leash and under the control of its owner or caregiver, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of an owner or caregiver who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) above while on the owner's property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to tether an animal outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  No animal shall be tethered and left unattended for more than 12 consecutive hours in a 24-hour period. However, for up to the 12-hour maximum an animal may be on an approved tethering system as outlined in this section; 
(2)  No animal shall be tethered except on a three-point pulley system; 
(3)  Only one animal may be attached to each tethering system; 
(4)  Any tethering device used to tether an animal shall not allow the animal to cross over the owner's property line; 
(5)  Tethers must be made of commercial approved leash or tethering material which cannot be chewed by the animal and shall not weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the animal; ropes and chains are not considered appropriate tethering material; 
(6)  The tether must be at least five times the body length of the dog and mounted no more than seven feet above the ground level; 
(7)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or pulley system to the animal's harness should allow access to the maximum available exercise area allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter; 
(8)  The animal must be attached to the tether by a properly fitted harness or collar with enough room between the collar and the animal's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal; 
(9)  The tethering system must be a sufficient distance from any other objects or animals to prohibit the tangling of the cable, to prohibit the cable from extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury or strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal from having access to the fence; 
(10)  The animal is not tethered outside during periods of local extreme weather which shall include but not be limited to an excessive heat warnings issued by the National Weather Service, temperatures at or below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius), thunderstorms, tornados, tropical storms, or hurricanes; 
(11)  The animal is at least six months of age; 
(12)  The animal is not sick or injured; and 
(13)  Animals transported in the rear of open vehicles shall be placed on a tether anchored securely and of appropriate length to prevent the animal from jumping off or being thrown from a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 17-13, § 3, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 5-8. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Responsibility. The owner or person having custody or control of any dog or cat four months of age or older shall be responsible for having each dog or cat vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Dogs and cats shall be revaccinated within ten days of the "rabies expiration date" recorded on the certificate of rabies vaccination issued for the animal. Three-year rabies vaccinations are authorized and encouraged. 
(b)  Certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian administering rabies vaccinations set forth in this chapter shall execute a certificate of rabies vaccination which has been approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources and furnished to the veterinarian by the animal control and enforcement division. No other rabies vaccination certificates are authorized for use for dogs and cats that are residents of Columbus, Georgia. The certificate of rabies vaccination shall be executed in accordance with administrative instructions issued by the chief of the animal control and enforcement division. There shall be three copies of the certificate. The original copy shall be given to the owner of the animal; the second copy shall be forwarded to the animal control and enforcement division within 15 days of vaccinating the animal; and the third copy shall be retained by the veterinarian. 
(c)  Out-of-state certificates of rabies vaccinations recognized. The valid certificates of rabies vaccination issued by licensed veterinarians of any of the 50 states will be accepted as evidence of vaccinations which is prerequisite to registration of the dog or cat with the animal control and enforcement division. In these cases the owner of a dog or cat is required to register the pet at the animal control and enforcement division's main office. 
(d)  Records. In addition to maintaining a computerized data file of rabies vaccinations and pet registrations, the animal control and enforcement division shall maintain an orderly indexed file of certificates of rabies vaccination for three years. 
(e)  Rabies vaccination tag: 
(1)  The term "rabies vaccination tag" shall mean a tag approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources and furnished to each veterinarian or veterinary clinic by the City of Columbus Animal Control and Enforcement Division. 
(2)  Concurrent with the issuance of the certificate of rabies vaccination, the person authorized to issue the certificate shall also furnish to the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat the serially numbered rabies vaccination tag described above. The serial number of the tag shall be entered in the appropriate space of the corresponding certificate of rabies vaccination. 
(f)  Requirement to display rabies vaccination tag: 
(1)  Dogs. The rabies vaccination tag issued for a dog shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the dog at all times, except under the special circumstances listed below: 
Exceptions authorized. Exceptions are authorized as follows, however, the owner shall be required to produce evidence of the rabies vaccination upon the request of an animal control officer: 
a.  A dog, while within the confines of the walls of the owner's house or apartment, is exempted from wearing the rabies tag. 
b.  Hunting or stock dogs and show dogs while being worked, conditioned, groomed and/or shown under the direct supervision and control of their owner, agents or employees of the owner are exempted from wearing the rabies tag. The rabies certificate must be available at the site of such activity for inspection on the request of an animal control officer. 
c.  A dog, which for medical or physical reasons is unable to wear a collar or harness, is exempted from wearing the rabies tag. Documentation from a licensed veterinarian must be presented as proof for this exemption. 
(2)  Cats. The wearing of rabies tags by cats shall be left to the discretion of the owners. If tags are not worn, evidence of vaccination must be produced upon the request of an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-8, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 8, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 92-44, § 1, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 5-9. - Registration of dogs and cats. 
(A)  Registration required. In addition to the requirement for rabies vaccination, owners of dogs and cats four months of age and older are required to register each such dog and/or cat with the animal control and enforcement division. The dog and/or cat must be vaccinated for rabies before registration is authorized and valid certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented before a dog or cat may be registered, except in the following specially exempted circumstances. A dog or cat may be registered without the required rabies vaccination when: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian has examined the animal and certified that at the time of registration such vaccination would endanger the animals health because of age, infirmity, debility, illness, or pregnancy. The exemption certificate must include the date when a rabies vaccination can be administered. 
(2)  The owner shall be required to have the exempted dog or cat vaccinated within ten days of the expiration date of the veterinarian's certificate. 
(3)  Veterinarians issuing exemption certificates are authorized to charge the pet owner a medical examination fee. 
(4)  Veterinarians registering animals under the provision of this exemption authorization shall attach a copy of the certificate to the animal registration form which shall be forwarded to the animal control and enforcement division in accordance with administrative instructions issued by the animal control and enforcement division. The owner of the animal will be provided with a copy of the certificate of exemption and the owner will be required to present the certificate for inspection on request of an animal control officer. 
(B)  To be worn. The dog shall wear the city registration tag as required by this ordinance and when a dog is vaccinated after expiration of the exemption certificate, the rabies vaccination tag shall also be worn as required by this ordinance. 
(C)  One-year and three-year registration: 
(1)  One-year permits are valid from the date of registration and expire on the date of expiration of the one-year rabies vaccination pursuant to subsection (F) below. 
(2)  Three-year permits may be issued only in conjunction with a three-year rabies vaccination. The three-year permit shall be valid from the date of registration and expire on the date of expiration of the three-year rabies vaccination. 
(D)  Certificate of registration. The certificate of rabies vaccination, when authenticated by the addition of the city registration tag number issued to a particular animal, shall serve the dual purpose of "certificate of rabies vaccination" and "animal registration." 
(E)  Requirement to display animal registration tag: 
(1)  Dogs. The animal registration tag issued for each dog shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the dog at all times, except under the special circumstances listed below: 
Exceptions authorized. Exceptions are authorized as follows, however, the owner shall be required to produce evidence of the registration upon the request of an animal control officer: 
a.  A dog, while within the confines of the walls of the owner's house or apartment, is exempted from wearing the registration tag. 
b.  Hunting or stock dogs and show dogs and cats, while being worked, conditioned, groomed and/or shown under the direct supervision and control of their owner, or agents or employees of the owner are exempted from wearing the animal registration tag while engaged in the exempted activity. The animal registration tag must be available at the site of such activity for inspection on request by an animal control officer. 
c.  A dog, which for medical or physical reasons is unable to wear a collar or harness, is exempted from wearing the registration tag. Documentation from a licensed veterinarian must be presented as proof for this exemption. 
(2)  Cats. The wearing of registration tags by cats shall be left to the discretion of the owners. If tags are not worn, evidence of registration must be produced upon the request of an animal control officer. 
(F)  Registration issuance; permit term, expiration; delinquent registration. One-year registration will be issued in conjunction with the rabies certificate. The one-year permit shall be valid from the date of registration and shall expire on the date of expiration of the one-year rabies vaccination. The permit must be purchased within 15 days of the rabies vaccination date or it will be considered delinquent. 
(1)  New residents. Upon presentation of a valid rabies vaccination certificate with six months or less remaining before vaccination due date, a new resident may purchase a permit for one-half the regular registration fee. 
(2)  Exceptions to delinquent registration. When the following specific circumstances exist, a registration shall not be considered delinquent: 
a.  A new resident of the city who is registering a pet for the first time in Columbus and has a valid current certificate of rabies vaccination and/or a valid current animal registration from another city, county, or state. The new resident must register the pet within 30 days of establishing residency. 
b.  Any newly purchased or acquired dog or cat which is registered within 15 days of the date purchased or acquired. Documentation showing the date of purchase or acquisition and a description of the animal must be presented at the time of registration to be eligible for this exemption. 
(G)  Registration fees . All dogs and cats four months of age or older must be registered. Effective July 1, 2014, the registration fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Altered dogs and cats . All dogs and cats which have been altered (spayed/neutered); or are less than nine months of age; or have a medical problem (certified by a licensed veterinarian) which would preclude surgery for a year or longer. A copy of the record from a licensed veterinarian certifying the animal has been spayed/neutered and a valid certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented at the time of the registration. 
a.  One-year registration ..... $ 10.00 
b.  Three-year registration ..... $ 30.00 
(2)  Non-altered dogs and cats . All non-altered (spayed/neutered) dogs and cats nine months of age or older; or without a veterinarian-certified medical exemption: 
a.  One-year registration ..... $ 40.00 
b.  Three-year registration ..... $ 120.00 
(3)  Free registration authorized . Free city registration is hereby authorized and free registration tags may be issued for dogs trained specifically to assist a person with disability when such dog is actually being used by a disabled person as an aid for that disability. A valid certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented along with the application for a free registration. 
(H)  Registration procedures; one-stop rabies vaccination—Pet registration : 
(1)  Agents . The chief of the animal control and enforcement division may authorize any veterinarian or veterinary clinic licensed to practice veterinary medicine in Columbus, Georgia, to act as agent and issue animal registration permits. The agents so designated shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and administrative instructions of the animal control and enforcement division. A veterinarian or veterinary clinic authorized to issue permits may collect a handling charge of up to $5.00 from the animal owner for each registered permit issued. 
(2)  List. The animal control and enforcement division will maintain a list of veterinarians participating in the "one-stop rabies vaccination—pet registration" program and shall disseminate the list to the public. 
(3)  Other pet registration locations authorized. Dogs and cats may be registered at the main office of the animal control and enforcement division. A current certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented before registration. Rabies vaccinations are not available at the animal control and enforcement division office. 
(4)  Registration by mail authorized. Application forms for registration by mail will be available at the animal control and enforcement office and will be made available to each veterinarian licensed and practicing in Columbus. 
(5)  Replacement of lost rabies tag or city registration tag. Replacement of lost rabies tags or city registration tags is hereby authorized. Application for replacements shall be made at the main office of the animal control and enforcement division, and a fee of $2.00 for each replacement tag is hereby authorized. 
(6)  Notice of change of ownership required. Registered dogs and cats sold, adopted, traded, or otherwise released to new owners, persons, kennels, or any other businesses or shelters shall be reported by such new owner to the animal control and enforcement division's main office within ten days of such sale or release. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-9, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, §§ 9, 10, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 87-70, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-87; Ord. No. 88-87, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 92-40, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 92-44, §§ 2, 3, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 14-30, §§ 1, 2, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 5-10. - Control of domestic animals. 
(a)  [Generally.] 
(1)  Irrespective of and/or in addition to impoundment provisions, including assessment of penalty fees relating to impoundment of animals as prescribed in other sections of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for owners of dogs to allow, permit, or by negligence to permit, their dogs to be unattended. Any dog on the owner's property and not confined thereto by fence, or other suitable and effective means, and when no responsible person is present to control such dog, shall be considered unattended and in violation of this chapter only if said dog has been observed on public property or private property other than property of the owner, and not in voice control of a responsible person, by an enforcement officer of Columbus, Georgia or by a complainant willing to testify in court. Dog and cat owners residing in rural areas of the city and whose lots are zoned RE-5 or RE-10 and whose said lots are five acres or more in area, are exempt from the requirements to keep dogs penned, or on a leash, and/or under voice control. These exempted owners are required to ensure that their dogs and cats do not leave the limits of the owner's property, and these owners are subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Upon the third conviction during a two-year period for a violation of subsection (a)(1), above, the individual so convicted shall pay a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $600.00. 
(b)  Female dogs. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a female dog, when it is breeding season, to go upon or have access to the streets, roads or public areas of Columbus, Georgia. Female dogs shall be confined in such places and manner as will avoid nuisances being caused by the attraction of male dogs to the premises of others or under any circumstances. 
(c)  Use of a leash on all public property. No owner or caretaker shall allow any canine, "dog" on any public property unless such animal is restrained by an appropriate leash and under the control of a responsible person. This restriction does not apply to local, state or federal public safety canine officers, to licensed search and rescue operations or to properly licensed animal shows or government-owned animal care facilities or properly licensed animal adoption facilities. 
(d)  Nuisance control. Without regard to other provisions of this article or other sections of the Columbus Code, it shall be unlawful for owners of dogs, cats, or other animals to allow, permit, or by negligence fail to prevent such animals from acting or performing in such a manner as to cause damage or unsanitary conditions to the property of another, public streets, public parks and recreation areas, or otherwise to cause a nuisance in Columbus. Animal owners residing in rural areas of the city on lots zoned A-1 (agricultural) and which lots are two and one-half acres or more in area, are exempt from nuisance control provisions contained in section 5-10(d)(4). Acts deemed to be nuisances shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any animal to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public except dogs trained specifically to assist a person with a disability when such dog is actually being used by a disabled person as an aid for that disability. 
(2)  Any dog to chase, run after, or jump at vehicles moving on public streets and alleys. 
(3)  Any dog to attack, bite or injure a person, or to snap, growl, snarl, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons without provocation, unless in defense, protection or assistance of its master or other persons, except when such person is using the dog in conjunction with a criminal activity. These acts shall be considered a violation of this chapter whether or not the dog is confined by fence, chain or leash, or under the voice control of a responsible person. 
(4)  Any animal to howl, yelp, whine, or bark in such manner as to reasonably disturb any person or neighborhood. 
(5)  Any animal to feed from, turn over, or otherwise disturb garbage containers. 
(6)  Any animal to scratch or dig in flower beds or to soil or damage any property other than that of the owners. 
(7)  Male animals to have access to female animals or vice versa during breeding season, except within enclosures so arranged as to obstruct such animals entirely from view of persons outside of such enclosures. 
(8)  Any dog or cat to go onto the property of another or onto public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks and recreation areas, or onto other public or private ways, and attack another animal or fowl. 
(9)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if, when a dog or cat deposits fecal matter on public ways or private property, the owner of the animal does not promptly remove such waste and deposit it in a sanitary manner. This requirement is applicable whether or not the animal is on a leash and/or under voice control. 
(10)  Cats or dogs to crawl upon, sleep on, scratch or otherwise soil furniture, porches, automobiles or other tangible property of a neighbor or person other than the owner. 
(11)  Transportation of animals. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a canine animal to be transported in the back of an open bed vehicle unless such animal is securely tethered by a cross tie to prevent such animal from jumping off or being thrown from the vehicle. 
(12)  Fencing. 
(A)  Owners that rely upon a fence to secure their canine animal must use a fence with a minimum height of four feet or of sufficient height and structural support to ensure that such animals are restrained within the confines of their property. The individual size and abilities of any canine animal shall determine the height of the fence. If such animal evades the fence, the owner shall be in violation of section 5-10(a). 
(B)  Owners may use electronic fencing as long as said fencing is operational to ensure that such animals are restrained within the confines of their property. If such animal evades the electronic fencing, the owner shall be in violation of section 5-10(a). 
(e)  Controlled access public events. It shall be unlawful for animals to be permitted at controlled access public events or in the immediate area where spectator sports events are held in city parks including practice events for spectator sports. The department of public services shall be authorized to erect appropriate signs under this provision. Exceptions are authorized as follows, however, the owner shall be required to produce evidence of rabies vaccination upon the request of an animal control officer: 
(1)  Dogs trained and used as a guide or seeing eye dog for a blind person. 
(2)  Dogs trained and used as a hearing dog for a deaf person. 
(3)  Police K-9 dogs. 
(4)  Caged animals being sponsored by the Humane Society. 
(5)  Animals competing or performing in the event. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-10, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 11, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 89-123, §§ 2, 3, 11-21-89; Ord. No. 90-91, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 91-25, 4-9-91; Ord. No. 92-43, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 92-106, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 96-62, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 98-44, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 04-65, §§ 4—6, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 17-13, § 4, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 5-11. - Dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(a)  All requirements concerning the classification, registration and maintenance of dangerous and vicious dogs will be enforced in Columbus as set forth in O.C.G.A Article 2 of Chapter 8 of Title 4, ("Responsible Dog Ownership Law"). The special enforcement division manager shall serve as the dog control officer for purposes of implementing the requirements of the state law. The animal control advisory board is hereby designated as the authority in Columbus charged with making all determinations and hearing all appeals required by the state law. 
(b)  The fee for registering dangerous or vicious dogs in Columbus, effective July 1, 2015, shall be $150.00 annually. The required collar and up to two warning signs shall be issued and are included in this fee. If additional signs are required, the cost is $5.00 per sign. 
(c)  The special enforcement division manager and the animal control advisory board are hereby authorized to regulate cats or other household pets which it determines to be dangerous or vicious in a manner similar to that specified by the Responsible Dog Ownership Law referenced above. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to display a dangerous/vicious dog or animal sign at locations or on premises where no such dangerous/vicious animal exists or is located. 
(e)  The dog control officer, any CCG animal control officer or any sworn law enforcement official is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the State law and such officers may confiscate any dangerous or vicious dog in the case of any violation of the law. 
(Ord. No. 15-33, § 3, 6-23-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-33, § 3, adopted June 23, 2015, repealed § 5-11 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 5-11 pertained to dangerous dog or cat and potentially dangerous dog or cat and derived from Ord. No. 89-123, § 4, adopted Nov. 21, 1989; Ord. No. 92-41, §§ 1—3, adopted June 9, 1992; and Ord. No. 97-36 adopted April 15, 1997. 
Sec. 5-12. - Cruelty to animals and failure to aid injured animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully and cruelly, to injure or kill any animal by any mode or means causing it unnecessary fright or pain, and it shall further be unlawful for any person, by neglect or otherwise, to cause or allow any animal to endure pain, suffering or injury. Acts violating this section shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Any violation of the Columbus Code Section 5-7.1 on shelter shall be guilty of a city ordinance violation, punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of the Columbus Code. 
(2)  Failure to provide animals food for a period of more than 24 hours and/or water or care for more than 18 hours. 
(3)  Abandoning any animal on private or public property. 
(4)  Failure on the part of the driver of a motor vehicle to stop or call the police or other agencies for assistance after striking or injuring an animal by the motor vehicle. 
(5)  Leaving or exposing any poisonous substance, food or drink, for man, animal or fowl or to aid or abet any person in so doing, except insect or rodent poison when used for control of insects, mice or rodents. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bait, to attack with violence to, provoke, or to harass an animal, domestic or wild, with one or more animals or humans, for the purpose of training such an animal for, or to cause or to sponsor or to promote such an animal to engage in fights, wrestling or similar contests with or among other animals or between animals and humans. Nothing in the foregoing sentence, however, shall prevent the lawful training of guard dogs or other animals, provided the same in no way conflicts with other provisions of this Code or state law. The minimum fine for violating this subsection (6) shall be $500.00. 
(7)  Tethering that does not meet the requirements of section 5-5(20). 
(8)  It shall be a violation of this section for an animal to be left unattended in a vehicle if the inside temperature of the vehicle exceeds 80 degrees. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-12, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, §§ 12, 13, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 88-72, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 04-65, §§ 7, 8, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 17-13, § 5, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 5-12.1. - Revocation of licenses of trainers, breeders, boarders and sellers of dogs or other animals convicted of cruelty to dogs or other animals. 
Any person convicted of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-5 (Cruelty to dogs) or O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-4 (Cruelty to animals) or any other comparable criminal prohibition against cruelty to animals that may be later enacted shall not thereafter be issued a license to train, breed, board or sell dogs or other animals in Columbus, Georgia, and the licenses of those persons being convicted of or entering guilty or nolo contendere pleas to said offenses shall immediately stand revoked, in addition to other penalties prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 92-110, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 5-13. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Animals subject to impoundment. Dogs, cats or other animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded in Columbus, Georgia: 
(1)  Dogs and other animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(2)  Vicious dogs and animals of all kinds. 
(3)  Female dogs in breeding season not confined to the premises of the owners in such manner as to avoid nuisances and prevent access to other animals. 
(4)  Dogs or other animals that have been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Dogs, cats, or other animals that are causing nuisances in violation of other sections of this chapter. 
(6)  Any dog not wearing a valid city registration and rabies vaccination tag. 
(7)  Any dog on the owner's property and not confined thereto by fence, chain, or other suitable and effective means, and when no responsible person is present to control such dog shall be unattended and in violation of this chapter only if said dog has been observed on public property or private property other than the property of the owner, and not in voice control of a responsible person, by an enforcement officer of Columbus, Georgia or by a complainant willing to testify in court. Section 5-10(a) of this chapter exempts owners of dogs and cats whose residence is in rural Columbus from the requirement to have the animal under constant control by a responsible person. Animals in these exempted areas are subject to impoundment if the animal is observed on property other than the owner's property. 
(b)  Notice of impoundment. Immediately upon impounding dogs, or other animals, the animal control officer or the animal control and enforcement division poundmaster responsible for having the animals impounded shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owners of such dogs, or other animals, so impounded and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals. 
(c)  When a resident of Columbus is no longer able to maintain a cat or dog of which he or she is the documented owner, he or she may surrender the animal to CCG Animal Control. A surrender fee of $20.00, will be charged upon surrender, and the owner will sign a document releasing all ownership rights to the animal and waiving any future notices concerning the disposition of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-13, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 14, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 87-70, § 2, 6-16-87; Ord. No. 92-105, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 15-33, § 4, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-13.1. - Disposition of animals. 
(a)  Holding time. Any impounded animal, not under observation for rabies, that is not claimed within five days of the date of impoundment or five days after the owner of the animal is notified, shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the director of public services. However, if the owner is incarcerated at the time of impoundment, the animal shall be held for ten days. After the tenth day the animal shall become the property of Columbus, Georgia and be disposed of in a manner approved by the director of public services. 
(b)  Adoption of animals. 
(1)  At the time of adoption of non-altered (spayed/neutered) animal from the city animal control center, the individual adopting said animal shall purchase, for the sum of $50.00, a spay/neuter voucher to be presented to the veterinarian of their choice to defray a portion of the cost of spaying or neutering the animal. The veterinarian may redeem said voucher by presenting same to the city. Effective July 1, 2010, adoption fees shall be $75.00 and said voucher shall be worth $50.00. 
(2)  No unclaimed dog or cat which is not neutered or spayed shall be released from the Columbus Animal Care and Control Center without a written agreement from the person adopting the animal that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days from the date of adoption, unless a later date is indicated on the adoption agreement due to the age or health condition of that particular animal. Within 45 days of the adoption or 15 days of the alternative date indicated on the adoption agreement, said owner will file with Columbus Animal Care and Control Center the signed statement of a licensed veterinarian that the animal in question has been neutered or spayed. Failure of the owner to file such a signed statement will result in a fine of $100.00 and constitute a presumption that there has been a failure to spay or neuter the adopted dog or cat. Upon such failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, a citation may be issued under O.C.G.A. § 4-14-3(c) to be prosecuted in environmental court as a misdemeanor by animal control officers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-14-4. 
(c)  Escape, injury or pilfering. The animal control officers, pound-masters and pound custodians shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, escape or pilfering of any dogs or cats which they deal with in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, but they shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(d)  When municipal or county agencies form outside of Muscogee County require the service of euthanasia, it may be provided at a cost of $10.00 per animal with an additional body disposal fee of $10.00. 
(e)  When euthanasia is requested by a resident of Muscogee County that is an animal owner, it may be provided at a cost of $10.00 per animal with an additional body disposal fee of $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-105, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 04-65, § 9, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 14-30, § 3, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-33, § 5, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-14. - Fee for recovery of impounded animals. 
(a)  Impoundment fee . In addition to city registration fees and board fees required by this chapter, there shall be an impoundment charge assessed against owners who recover their animals which are impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The impoundment fee shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(Subsequent impoundments are levied against the animal owner and not necessarily for the same animal.) 
(b)  Board fee . In addition to city registration fees and impoundment fees required by this chapter, there shall be a board fee of $10.00 per day, payable before an impounded animal will be released to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 15-33, § 6, 6-23-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-33, § 6, adopted June 23, 2015, repealed § 5-14 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 5-14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-14, adopted Oct. 2, 1984 and Ord. No. 91-42 adopted June 9, 1992. 
Sec. 5-15. - Private/hobby kennels (noncommercial). 
(a)  Any person who maintains within or adjoining his property a combined total of six or more dogs and/or cats over six months of age as personal or family pets, or for recreational use, or for exhibition, breeding, and where sale of offspring is not the primary function shall be required to have a private/hobby kennel permit. 
(b)  Private/hobby (noncommercial) permits shall be issued by the chief of animal control and enforcement division. Such permits will be valid for one calendar year and shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of the year in which issued. Permits shall be renewed each year between January 1 and February 28. Applications received after February 28 shall be considered delinquent. 
(c)  Locations of private/hobby kennels shall comply with the zoning ordinance of Columbus, and before a private/hobby kennel permit will be issued the applicant must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the code enforcement officer authorizing the private/hobby kennel at the address specified in the application. 
(d)  There shall be a $100.00 inspection and permit fee for each private/hobby kennel permit. 
(e)  The chief of animal control and enforcement division shall have the authority to revoke private/hobby kennel permits when sanitation standards prescribed by this chapter and other ordinances are not maintained. 
(f)  Kennel permits (pets—nonbreeding): 
(1)  Such permits issued prior to July 1984 shall be valid until revoked by proper issuing authority or terminated by applicant. 
(2)  Actions upon complaints. Upon receipts of complaints of nuisance (section 5-10(d)) caused by maintaining a pet nonbreeding kennel, the chief of animal control and enforcement division shall have an inspection made of such facilities. After a notice allowing reasonable time to correct the nuisance has been issued to the responsible person, and such notice has failed to produce compliance, the permit for maintaining such kennel may be revoked by the issuing authority. 
(3)  Any person whose kennel permit is revoked must within ten days comply with existing ordinances regarding number of animals maintained and show proof of the manner of humane disposal of all animals over the legal number authorized by current ordinance. 
(g)  Appeals of denial or revocation of a permit may be made to the animal control advisory board at the board's next scheduled meeting. Notice of intent to appeal a decision of the chief of animal control and enforcement division must be made in writing and filed with the administrative officer, animal control and enforcement division. Final action on a denial and/or revocation of a permit shall be delayed pending a decision of the animal control advisory board. The decision of the advisory board shall be final as to administrative processing of the application or revocation. Denial of a certificate of occupancy by the code enforcement division is not subject to review by the animal control advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-15, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 01-53, § 1, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 15-33, § 7, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-16. - Commercial kennels. 
(a)  Commercial kennel defined. Section 22-3 of the zoning ordinance of Columbus defines a Commercial Kennel as follows: 
"A kennel maintained for the purpose of offering any service whatsoever, including, but not limited to, boarding, grooming, breeding, keeping for sale, selling, trading, training, renting, or leasing for guard purposes any dogs or other animals. 
(b)  Business license required. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or kennel (as heretofore defined), regardless of the number of the animals kept, to engage regularly in the sale of cats, dogs, kittens, or puppies, regardless of the age of the animals, without having a business license which specifically authorizes commercial kennel activities. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy required. The business license department shall require a valid and current certificate of occupancy for commercial kennel before such business license is issued. 
(d)  Maintenance of yards and pens. In addition to the minimum requirements for lot size and structural specifications required by the zoning ordinance and building code of Columbus, yards and pens for dogs shall be in accordance with the standards for such dog yards and pens as required by this chapter. 
(e)  Waste disposal. Fecal matter and urine from animals shall be disposed of into the city sanitary sewerage system and shall not be allowed to drain or leak into the rainwater sewerage system. 
(f)  Kennel sanitation. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain within Columbus, Georgia, any kennel that is unsanitary, nauseous, foul, or offensive, or in any way detrimental to public health and/or safety. 
(g)  Rabies vaccination. The owner, manager or person in charge of a commercial kennel (as herein defined) shall be responsible for ensuring that all dogs and cats four months of age or over that are on the premises and offered for sale have been vaccinated for rabies. This requirement applies even if the animals are on consignment. The certificate of rabies vaccination and the rabies tag for each such animal shall be available for inspection on request by an animal control officer. 
(h)  There shall be a $100.00 inspection and permit fee for each commercial kennel permit. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-16, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 15, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 15-33, § 8, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-17. - Complaints against animal control procedures or personnel. 
Any complaints about animal control procedures or personnel should be brought to the animal control advisory board at the regularly scheduled meeting. If the complaint is particularly urgent and concerns allegations of wrongdoing or impropriety against an animal control officer, the complaint should be brought immediately to the chairman of the animal control advisory council. He will refer the case to a panel composed of three members of the animal control advisory board for their deliberation. The panel will function in the same manner as the personnel review board currently functions. A hearing will be held where those presenting the complaint will have ample opportunity to come before the board, explain their complaint and bring whatever witnesses and documentation forward. The animal control division will make available whatever personnel necessary to provide required information. Based on the facts as presented to them, the panel will render a finding in the case, either that the allegations are unsubstantiated or that the allegations are substantiated. If the panel finds the allegations substantiated, then they will recommend appropriate remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-17, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-18. - Animal bites; quarantine of animals. 
(a)  Animal bites defined. The breaking of the skin of a human being by an animal shall be considered a bite case. 
(b)  Reporting procedure. All bite cases must be reported to the Columbus Department of Public Health. During nonbusiness hours, the report shall be made to the 911 Emergency Center. The bite report should be made as soon as possible, and in no case more than 24 hours after the bite. Animal control officers will assist in making bite reports but the responsibility rests with the owners and the person bitten to ensure that a complete report is made to the Columbus Department of Public Health. Failure to make the bite report as required shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day that shall pass after the bite without the animal bite being reported as required, shall constitute an additional violation. 
(c)  Quarantine required: 
(1)  Any animal which has broken the skin of a human or is suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined for at least ten days, and no such animal shall be released to the owner or humanely euthanized until the animal has been examined by a veterinarian or the rabies control officer at the expiration of the ten-day period and released from quarantine. 
(2)  The animal may be quarantined at the owner's residence at the discretion of the rabies control officer. 
(3)  The rabies control officer is authorized to require that the animal be quarantined at the city pound, or the animal owner is authorized to request that the animal be quarantined in a veterinary clinic. In this instance the owner is responsible for all board and veterinary medical costs incurred pursuant to the quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-18, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 16, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 5-19. - Guard dogs. 
(a)  General. Control and identification of guard dogs in the interest of protection of law-abiding citizens from attack from such dogs is of paramount importance. 
(b)  Registration of guard dogs required: 
(1)  Individuals, firms, companies, or corporations who own, rent, lease, or otherwise provide dogs for the purpose of guarding property or establishments within the city limits of Columbus are required to register each guard dog with the animal control and enforcement division. This registration shall be required even if the guard dog(s) are trained or housed outside of Columbus while not actually guarding premises or property. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements for rabies vaccination, section 5-8, and city registration tag, section 5-9, each guard dog residing in or rented, leased, or used for guarding in Columbus shall be required to wear a distinctive red leather collar with a numbered identification tag fastened thereon. 
(3)  The distinctive guard dog collars shall be available at the animal care and control center at a cost of $50.00. 
(c)  Control of guard dogs. Guard dogs shall be controlled or confined so that they cannot come into contact with law-abiding citizens who are lawfully using public and private premises. 
(d)  Reporting loose guard dogs. In the event a guard dog escapes its place of containment and is running loose in public areas or on property other than the owner's, the person employing such dog and the owner of such dog shall immediately report all facts and circumstances, including the collar number of the dog, to the animal control and enforcement division. After normal business hours the report shall be made to the 911 Emergency Center. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-19, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 17, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 01-53, § 2, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 15-33, § 9, 6-23-15) 
Sec. 5-20. - Requirements for community cat colonies and caretakers. 
A community cat caretaker is exempt from the responsibilities of an owner under this chapter and shall not be required to meet the requirements of sections 5-15 or 5-16 of this article; however, all community cat colonies must be registered with Columbus Animal Care and Control or the designated community cat rescue and the community cat colony caretaker must comply with all of the following: 
(1)  The community cat rescue organization has inspected the area in which the colony will be housed and has approved; 
(2)  Regular feeding of the colony will be maintained throughout the year; 
(3)  Adult cats and kittens over 12 weeks of age that can be captured will be neutered or spayed and vaccinated against rabies. A three-year vaccine will be administered whenever feasible; 
(4)  Every reasonable attempt will be made to have kittens removed from the colony and fostered before they reach the age of 12 weeks for domestication and placement when placement is a possibility; 
(5)  Whenever reasonably possible, sick or injured cats will be removed from the colony by the colony caretaker and taken to a licensed veterinarian for evaluation. The decision either to treat or euthanize shall be at the entire discretion of the veterinarian; 
(6)  Cats will be ear tipped for recognition as members of a community cat colony; 
(7)  Records of sterilization, vaccination and animal identification will be maintained by the community cat rescue for a minimum of three (3) years and made available to Columbus Animal Care and Control or state licensing authorities for review upon request; 
(8)  If colonies are established on private property, permission has been given to the community cat rescue or colony caretaker from the owner of the premises upon which the community cat colony is located for the community cat colony to be located on the owner's property; and 
(9)  Compliance with the policies and procedures governing the community cat program. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § II, 3-12-13) 
Sec. 5-21. - Removal of community cats from colony. 
Columbus Animal Care and Control has the right to immediately seize and remove all or parts of any community cat colony for public health and public safety concerns including rabies, other zoonotic disease epidemics, and certain fatal animal to animal diseases as identified by the city veterinarian or the state veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § II, 3-12-13) 
Sec. 5-22. - Unlawful interference with identified community cat colony. 
Except as provided in section 5-21 of this article, it is unlawful for any person knowingly to prevent, interfere with, or obstruct the management of an identified community cat colony. However, nothing herein shall prohibit a property owner from taking lawful steps to control or restrict community cats within the limits of the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § II, 3-12-13) 
Sec. 5-23. - Disposition of community cats—Generally. 
Columbus Animal Care and Control may impound feral cats which are not identified as community cats by ear tipping and place those cats for adoption or make such other humane disposition of the animal in accordance with this chapter; however where feasible, the cat may be vaccinated, neutered and ear tipped and released to the community cat rescue which will place the cat in a community cat colony, or placed with an individual who is willing to be identified as responsible for that cat's welfare. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § II, 3-12-13) 
Secs. 5-24—5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOOFED ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-30. - Compliance with Code required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the corporate limits of the City of Columbus, any hoofed animal, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, and the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-30, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-31. - Restrictions on keeping certain hoofed animals. 
(a)  Keeping of hogs and cows is permitted only in the rural areas of Columbus which are specifically designated and zoned A-1 (agriculture) in the zoning atlas of Columbus in accordance with Chapter 22 of the Columbus Code, entitled "The Zoning Ordinance." 
(b)  In addition to the restrictions established by the zoning ordinance as to location, it shall be unlawful to maintain or keep a hog closer than 900 feet of any private residence, other than that of the owner, or public building. 
(c)  In addition to restrictions established by the zoning ordinance as to yard or pen location, it shall be unlawful to maintain or keep a cow closer than 500 feet of any private residence, other than that of the owner, or any public building. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-31, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-32. - Transporting through city. 
The preceding section hereof is not to apply where such animals are being carried through the city for bona fide sale or transportation or for slaughter, and only temporarily kept in the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-32, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-33. - Running unattended. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any horses, mules, jacks, cattle, hogs, goats or sheep to run unattended on public property or private property other than the property of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-33, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 86-34, § 18, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 5-34. - Cleanliness of pens. 
Any place, including yards, pens, enclosures, lots or premises within the City of Columbus at which fowl or animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition free of obnoxious odors and fly-breeding media or attraction. For the purposes of this article, the definition of "animals" shall include dogs and rabbits as well as any other animals kept for any reason whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-34, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-35. - Stable requirements. 
All hoofed animals kept within the City of Columbus shall be kept in a stable which meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The stables shall be not less than 50 feet from the owner's dwelling and not less than 150 feet from any other residence; however, the distance requirements to other residences may be waived in writing by adjoining property owners whose residences are within 150 feet of stables, but in no event may the distance be less than 75 feet. A change in ownership shall not affect the right to continue to maintain a stable without consent of the new adjoining owners. 
(2)  The stable shall be screened and fly-proofed to minimize contamination from flies and other insects. 
(3)  The stable shall be floored with packed clay or other durable material covered with suitable disposable materials to allow removal of droppings and urine. 
(4)  The stable area shall be well drained, dry, and reasonably odor-free. 
(5)  The disposable waste products from the stable shall be removed in covered containers, temporary storage of waste shall be limited to seven days' accumulation, and the storage area shall be vermin-proofed and established at a distance from residence equal to or greater than that prescribed for the stable. 
(6)  Exercise areas, riding rings, and areas surrounding the stable shall be free of animal droppings and maintained under sanitary conditions which preclude accumulation of wastes which produce offensive odors. 
(7)  The stable areas shall be fenced with either a high single fence or double fence which prevents the animal from cropping foliage or grasses beyond the owner's boundaries. 
(8)  Animal food, grain, or grain products, except hay or other forage shall be kept in covered metal containers under vermin-free conditions. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-35, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-36. - Vans and trailers. 
The maintenance and parking of vans and animal trailers shall be limited to off-street areas in a manner which shall not detract from the general appearance of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-36, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-37. - Inspection by health department. 
Health authorities shall have the right to inspect the premises on which animals are stabled at all times, and should it be found that animals are not kept in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or are a health and sanitation hazard, the health officers shall have the authority to order the animals removed from the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-37, 10-2-84) 
Secs. 5-38, - 5-39. Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POISONOUS SNAKES 

Sec. 5-40. - Keeping in city limits. 
(a)  Distance from residences. Possession of live poisonous snakes within 300 feet of a residence is prohibited. 
(b)  Exception. It shall be unlawful to possess live poisonous snakes within 300 feet of a residence within Columbus, Georgia, except by public institutions for research or education. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-40, 10-2-84) 
ARTICLE V. - WILD BIRDS 

Sec. 5-41. - Protection. 
(a)  City designated bird sanctuary. The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Columbus is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Signs. Appropriate signs are hereby authorized to be erected designating the City of Columbus as a bird sanctuary. 
(c)  Trapping, etc., unlawful. It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird's nests, except that shooting of game birds may be allowed during hunting seasons in accordance with regulations of the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)  Destruction of nuisance species. In the event any species of bird is found to be a nuisance in the opinion of the Columbus Department of Public Health, then said species of bird may be destroyed in such manner as is deemed advisable by the Columbus Department of Public Health under the supervision of the police department of the City of Columbus. 
(Ord. No. 84-91, § 5-41, 10-2-84) 
Sec. 5-42. - Keeping of fowl. 
(a)  When permitted. The keeping of fowl shall be allowed as an accessory use on any lot two acres or more in size. The keeping of such domestic fowl shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The number of domestic fowl kept on a given lot shall not exceed the ratio of one bird unit per one acre, with a bird unit identified as follows: 
32 chickens equals one bird unit. 
16 ducks equals one bird unit. 
8 turkeys equals one bird unit. 
8 geese equals one bird unit. 
(2)  When determining the number of domestic fowl permitted, only fowl six weeks or older in age shall be counted. 
(b)  Compliance with zoning ordinance. The keeping of racing, homing or exhibition (fancy) pigeons shall be allowed as an accessory use of a residential lot only in accordance with the "minimum requirements" set forth in the zoning ordinance and the distance from adjacent dwelling requirement established by paragraph (c)(3) of section 5-42. 
(c)  Location of accessory structures. All accessory structures associated with the keeping or housing of animals shall be located in accordance with the provisions stated as follows: 
(1)  Barns or other structures used in connection with agriculture, to include structures for the keeping, confining or sheltering of any poultry as defined in subsection (a)(1) above, shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any lot line. In no instance shall such structures be used for retail sales, except as permitted under the business license section of this Code. 
(2)  Barns or other structures used for the confining or sheltering of domestic fowl not in connection with agriculture shall be no closer than 50 feet to any lot line. 
(3)  Cages, lofts, pens and other structures which are used for the keeping of homing, racing or exhibition (fancy) pigeons shall be located no closer than 150 feet from the nearest part of a house occupied by a person other than the keeper of the birds. 
(d)  Fowl commonly excepted. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this section, exotic chickens, ducks and geese six weeks old, birds such as canaries, parakeets, doves, and parrots or other exotic birds normally kept as pets or primarily for hobby purposes shall not be subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(e)  Businesses excluded. Retail stores properly licensed under other provisions of this Code which maintain exotic chickens, ducks and geese six weeks of age, canaries, parakeets, doves, parrots, and other exotic birds for the purpose of retail sales from inventory, and other properly licensed poultry related industries other than retail sales to pet owners shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, except for paragraph (f). 
(f)  Noise and odors. Notwithstanding any of the provisions contained herein, at no time shall an owner of domestic fowl place a structure or keep domestic fowl in any fashion which would cause emission of noise or odor detrimental to other property or individuals residing thereon in the area. Further, it shall be unlawful to allow domestic fowl or other exotic fowl or birds to run on public property or private property other than the property of its owner. 
(g)  Notice of violation. Any owner of birds or fowl in Columbus, or any owner of property used for the keeping of birds or fowl in the city, shall be notified in writing of any violation of this section by the department of public services or the health department, and shall be given 30 days to correct stated violation. If after 30 days from the date of the notice, the owner of the birds or fowl or the property owner or occupant of the premises where the birds or fowl reside fails to comply with the provisions of this section, a citation to appear in the recorder's court may be issued to such person. 
(Ord. No. 85-118, § 1, 10-15-85) 
Chapter 6 - AUCTIONS, DAMAGED GOODS, REMOVAL, ETC., SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the time this Code was published this chapter was titled "Auctions." The title was changed by the editors to include the provisions of Ord. No. 58-95 codified as Art. II, §§ 6-8—6-11. 

ARTICLE I. - AUCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— For provisions regulating jewelry, auction sales, see Ga. Code, § 84-1701 et seq.; for tax on auctioneers, see § 92-1901. 

Sec. 6-1. - Auction of certain items—Hours of sale. 
No person shall offer for sale or sell at public auction any diamonds or any other precious or semi-precious stones or imitations thereof, watches, clocks, jewelry, gold, silver or plated ware, china, glassware, oriental rugs or imitations or leather goods, or any other articles of similar nature between the hours of six o'clock p.m. and six o'clock a.m., nor at any time during the month of December prior to the next business day after the 25th day of December. 
(Ord. of 9-18-28, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-50, § 1; Ord. No. 66-24, § 1, 2-14-66) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-24, § 1, amended § 6-1 to include oriental rugs or imitations in the items regulated. 
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Bond, amount, approval; parties. 
No person shall sell for himself or others any of such goods at public auction within the city until such person owning such goods or conducting such sale shall have executed and filed with the city clerk a bond with good and sufficient surety conditioned to pay to the city or any person or persons suing in the name of the city for his or their use, for loss or damage sustained by such person on account of dishonest or fraudulent conduct or false representations in the conduct of any auction sale of such goods. Such bond shall be in the sum of $5,000.00, shall be for the term of 24 months from its date, and the sureties shall be subject to the approval of the city clerk. Such bond shall provide that the principal or principals and the surety or sureties may be sued separately or together and that the surety or sureties may be sued without prior suit against the principal or principals. 
(Ord. of 9-18-28, § 2; Ord. of 5-30-50, § 2) 
Sec. 6-3. - License—For each sale; required; application information. 
Before any person shall sell or offer to sell any merchandise of the types and kinds described in section 6-1 hereof at public auction, he shall first procure a license therefor, which shall be in addition to any other licenses [3] now or hereafter required for the conduct of any business in the city. Such person shall make application for such license to the marshal of the city, setting forth his name and residence or the partners' names and residences, or if a corporation, its name and the place where and date when incorporated, and if a foreign corporation the date when it qualified to do business in Georgia; the place where such auction sale is to be conducted; that such sale will be conducted in accordance with this chapter and the applicable laws of the State of Georgia; and a statement that the applicant agrees to and accepts the reservation by the city of the right and power to suspend or revoke such license as set forth in the following section hereof. Upon the receipt of such application and upon the payment by the applicant of all special or license taxes required by ordinances of this city, the marshal shall issue a license authorizing such person to conduct such an auction sale, with the right and power reserved in the city to suspend or revoke such license as provided in the following section hereof. 
(Ord. of 5-30-50, § 3) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— For provisions relevant to occupational licenses, it will be necessary to examine the current general tax ordinance of the city, which ordinance is enacted each year and is not included in this Code. 

Sec. 6-4. - Same—Suspension by marshal; revocation, hearing. 
If the marshal of the city shall have reason to believe that any person conducting such an auction sale has violated or is violating wilfully and knowingly any of the provisions of this chapter or of any present or future law of the State of Georgia regulating the conduct of jewelry auctions, or if he is instructed so to do by the city commission, he shall forthwith suspend such license and shall immediately notify such person to cease and desist from conducting such auction sale until the next meeting of the city commission. The marshal shall report any such suspension to the next regular or adjourned meeting of the city commission, together with a summary of the facts upon which he based such suspension. The commission shall, at such next regular or adjourned meeting, consider such report of the marshal and shall give such person a full opportunity to present any facts or evidence bearing on such alleged violation. If the commission shall find that such person has violated or is violating, knowingly and wilfully, any provision of this chapter or of any law of the State of Georgia regulating jewelry auctions, it shall have, and does hereby specifically reserve, the right and power forthwith to revoke such license. If the commission shall not revoke such license at such meeting, the suspension of such license shall be at an end. The action of the marshal, in suspending any license as above provided, in good faith, shall not be grounds for any action for damages against the marshal nor against the city. 
(Ord. of 5-30-50, § 4) 
Sec. 6-5. - False advertising; applicability of section. 
No person shall make, publish, disseminate, or place before the public, or cause directly or indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, or placed before the public in a newspaper, poster, sign or other publication, or over any radio station or loudspeaker, or by word of mouth, any advertisement or statement of any sort regarding such an auction sale, the merchandise to be sold therein under the terms and conditions of such sale, which advertisement or statement contains any assertion or representation which is untrue, misleading or deceptive. The provisions of this section are not intended to prohibit any newspaper, radio station or any other advertising agency from publishing or otherwise disseminating any advertisement of an auction sale when such newspaper, radio station or other advertising agency publishes or disseminates such advertisement in good faith and without knowledge that the same is untrue, misleading or deceptive. 
(Ord. of 5-30-50, § 5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Exempt sales. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Judicial sales nor sales by executors or administrators. 
(b)  Persons holding an interest in land upon which such auction sales are conducted where such interest in land is for a period of time of not less than one year. 
(Ord. of 9-18-28, § 3; Ord. of 5-30-50, § 6; Ord. No. 76-36, § 1, 4-20-76) 
Sec. 6-7. - Penalty. 
Any person, for himself or as agent or employee of another, violating any provision of this chapter or conducting such an auction before the execution and approval of the bond prescribed herein, or without obtaining the license prescribed herein or where such license shall be suspended as provided herein, shall, upon conviction before the recorder, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-18-28, § 4; Ord. of 5-30-50, § 7) 
ARTICLE II. - DAMAGED GOODS, REMOVAL, ETC., SALES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Art. II, §§ 6-8—6-11, is derived from an ordinance enacted October 6, 1958, and effective November 7, 1958. As said ordinance did not amend this Code it has been codified at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 6-8. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
(a)  Fire and other altered goods sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
(b)  Going-out-of-business sale is a sale held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: Adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's; end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvents; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business. 
(c)  Removal of business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 58-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9. - Surrender of retail license, permit from city marshal, enumerated conditions requisite to conduct sales. 
Any person or firm holding a retail license issued by the city under the general tax ordinance [5] of the city for a period of at least six months who desires to advertise and conduct any one of the types of sales defined in section 6-8 may surrender his current license to the city marshal and conduct such sale or sales at the place of business for which his current license is issued, and the following conditions and requirements shall apply to the conduct of any such sale or sales defined in section 6-8: 
(a)  The right to conduct such sale or sales shall apply only to persons holding a current license under the general tax ordinance of the city for a period of at least six months and the permit granted hereunder shall expire at the end of the 45-day period allowed under subsection (c) of this section or any extension of such period granted under such subsection (c). 
(b)  Such sale or sales may be extended and conducted only at the place of business licensed under the existing general tax ordinance, except that any fire or other altered goods sale may be conducted at any location in the city. 
(c)  Such sale or sales may be advertised and conducted only for a period of 45 days following the surrender of the current license to the city marshal, but, upon application made to the city marshal the length of time for the advertisement and conduct of such sale or sales may be extended. 
(d)  The right to advertise and conduct such sale or sales shall be personal and not transferable to any other person or firm except that upon the death of a person doing business under a license issued under the general tax ordinance, his or her heirs, administrators or executors shall have the right to conduct any sale or sales provided for in section 6-8. 
(e)  After the completion of such sale the current license shall be cancelled by the city marshal except that the holder of any license conducting a fire or other altered goods sale shall have his license returned to him by the city marshal and the same shall be valid during the year for which it was originally issued. 
(f)  No license fee shall be required for the issuance of the permit authorized hereunder but any person conducting such a sale or sales shall not be relieved from the payment of any gross receipts license requirements on the merchandise disposed of through such sale or sales. 
(g)  Any person or firm making application for permission to conduct such sale shall furnish, as a part of said application, a complete and detailed inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale as disclosed by applicant's records. Said inventory shall be attached to and become a part of the application and shall include all merchandise on back order to be delivered at a later date. All merchandise on back order, to be delivered at a later date, must have been ordered more than 90 days prior to the filing of the application. 
(h)  No merchandise shall be stocked for sale except such merchandise as is on hand or back order as defined in the foregoing subsection of this section. Each item of merchandise stocked in such places of business in violation of the terms hereof, shall be presumed to be stocked for sale and each item thus stocked for sale shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58-95, § 2; Ord. No. 60-1, § 1, 1-11-60; Ord. No. 64-22, 5-4-64) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 64-22 amended Ord. No. 58-95, § 2, from which § 6-9 was derived, to add a new subsection (8) which the editors have designated (h) above. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The general tax ordinance embracing gross receipts tax, occupational license tax, etc., is not included in this Code. 

Sec. 6-9.1. - Operation of similar business in same location forbidden for one year to seller under section 6-8. 
Any person who has advertised and conducted such a sale as regulated hereunder, shall not be granted a license to conduct a similar type of business at the same location for a period of one year from the date of a sale conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 60-1, § 2, 1-11-60) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 60-1, § 1, enacted January 11, 1960, amended section 2 of Ord. No. 58-95 by adding paragraph 7, hereinabove set out as § 6-9(g); section 2 of Ord. No. 60-1 amended section 2 of Ord. No. 58-95 by adding paragraph 8, hereinabove set out as § 6-9.1. 
Sec. 6-10. - Designated persons exempt from article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(a)  Persons acting pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(c)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(d)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 58-95, § 3) 
Sec. 6-11. - Penalty for violation of article provisions. 
Any person or firm advertising or conducting any one or more of the type of sales provided for in section 6-8 hereof who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of a violation hereof in the recorder's court of the city be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 58-95, § 4) 