CODE OF ORDINANCES OF CLAY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: July 15, 2003 
____________ 
Originally Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners in 2003 
____________ 
Republished, 2008 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
CLAY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 2003 CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Gerald Von Anderson, III, Chairman 
Willie McCoy, Vice Chairman 
David Shivers 
Daniel Giles 
Byron Sands 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
H. Blake Proctor 
County Administrator 
____________ 
William H. Mills, Esq. 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Kathleen Krivan 
County Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of 
CLAY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 2008 REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Gerald Von Anderson, III, Chairman 
Willie McCoy, Vice Chairman 
David Shivers 
Barry Waters 
Walton Killingsworth 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Pamela Ward 
County Administrator 
____________ 
William H. Mills, Esq. 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Teresa Smith 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code is a republication of the 2003 Code of Ordinances. Ordinances and resolutions were added in this republication through Resolution No. 08-021, adopted June 3, 2008. The state law references were updated and new ones were added where appropriate. 
The page numbering system used in this republication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was prepared under the supervision of Eric Grant, Vice President—Supplement Department, and Linda Davis, Editor, with the able assistance of the MCC staff. 
The publisher is most grateful to the officials of the county, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and Clay County, Georgia. 2008. 
ORDINANCE 03-102 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COUNTY OF CLAY, STATE OF GEORGIA, HEREBY ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR CLAY COUNTY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY DEALING WITH SUCH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE; AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Clay County, Georgia are inadequately arranged and classified, and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the County, and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and 
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Georgia empower and authorize the County to revise, amend, restate, codify, and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published, and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and 
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of Clay County has authorized a general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances and resolutions of the County of a general and permanent nature, and the publication of such ordinances and resolutions in book form; and 
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the County and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the County that this adopting ordinance take effect at an early date. 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the County Commission of the County of Clay, State of Georgia, as follows: 
Section 1. That the general ordinances of Clay County, Georgia, as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of Clay County, Georgia." 
Section 2. That such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1, above shall constitute the following Titles and new Titles as required: 

 
Section 3. That all prior ordinances and resolutions of a permanent nature pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, that such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by this Code. 
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the Clay County Commission, and the County Clerk is hereby authorized and instructed to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
Section 5. That such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, below, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations therein contained as of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given. 
Section 6. That this Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED after first reading in its entirety this 1st day of July, 2003, and after second and final reading by title only this 15th day of July, 2003. 
COUNTY OF CLAY COUNTY 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
TITLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 10 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10.01 - Title of Code. 
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the "The Code of Clay County, Georgia," for which designation "Code of Ordinances," "Codified Ordinances" or "Code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code. 
State Law reference— Duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 10.02 - Interpretation. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law. 
Sec. 10.03 - Application to future ordinances. 
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 10.04 - Construction of Code. 
(A)	This Code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment thereto reenacted by this Code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it had not been repealed by this Code. All rules and regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this Code. 
(B)	Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this Code is continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation. 
(C)	The numerical order and position of sections in this Code does not resolve a conflict between two or more sections. 
(D)	Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division. 
(E)	All references within a section of this Code to any section of previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment. 
(F)	(1)	The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this Code, as originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application or construction of the law they precede. 
(2)	Each note following a section of this Code is for reference purposes only and is not a part of the section. 
(G)	All references to any section of this Code refer to all subsequent amendments to that section unless otherwise provided. 
Sec. 10.05 - Rules of interpretation; definitions. 
(A)	Rules of interpretation. This Code shall be construed by the following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or context of the provision. 
(1)	Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
(2)	Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of persons, unless otherwise declared in the section giving the authority. 
(3)	Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid. 
(4)	Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
(B)	Definitions. For the purpose of this Code of Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
County. Clay County, Georgia. 
Highway. Bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise expressly provided. 
Month. One calendar month. 
Person. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, co-partnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms person or whoever as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof. 
Preceding and following. When referring to sections or divisions in this Code, the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated. 
Written and in writing. 
(a)	Printing, lithographing or other modes of representing words and letters.
(b)	Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person's mark. 
Year. One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided. 
Sec. 10.06 - Severability. 
(A)	If any section of this Code now enacted or subsequently amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section or application. 
(B)	Except in the case of a section or amendment to this Code containing a non-severability provision, each division or part of every section is severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless: 
(1)	The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid provision or application; or 
(2)	The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or application. 
(C)	This section applies to every section of this Code regardless of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this Code. 
Sec. 10.07 - Reference to other sections. 
Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 10.08 - Reference to offices; name designations. 
(A)	Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
(B)	Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were transferred. 
Sec. 10.09 - Errors and omissions. 
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error. 
Sec. 10.10 - Reasonable time. 
(A)	In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice. 
(B)	The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded. 
Sec. 10.11 - Repeal or modification of Code section. 
(A)	When a section of this Code is repealed which repealed a former section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this Code, the former section or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
(B)	Any ordinance or resolution to repeal a section of this Code shall require a public hearing before final adoption by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 1, 5-15-2012)
Sec. 10.12 - Limitation periods. 
The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, to the prosecution of offenses or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this Code shall not be affected by the repeal and reenactment. All suits, proceedings and prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this Code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this Code had not been enacted. 
Sec. 10.13 - Ordinances unaffected. 
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. 
Sec. 10.14 - Ordinances which amend or supplement Code. 
(A)	If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this Code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place. 
(B)	Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance. 
(C)	All ordinances proposed, whether by addition to the Code or by amendment, shall be initiated by the Board of Commissioners as a resolution for the addition of a new ordinance or the amending of an existing ordinance. Such resolution shall provide a numerical number by the year and sequence of adoption. 
(D)	Resolutions proposed for amending or supplementing the Code may be adopted at such time of presentation, provided the amendment or supplement contains no taxing provision or penalty of fine or incarceration provision nor amends an existing provision that provides for taxation or penalty. 
(E)	Resolutions proposed for amending or supplementing the Code containing provisions to impose a tax or criminal penalty by fine or incarceration or amend an existing provision providing for taxation or penalties shall be adopted upon the resolution presentation being made at a regular or called meeting of the Board as a first reading and initial approval for adoption, public notice of same being given by publication for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ of the county providing the date, place, and time of the consideration for final approval by the Board for implementation. Copies of the proposed resolution shall be filed with the County office and the Clerk of Superior Court upon its being first proposed. 
(Res. No. 06-016, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 10.15 - Section histories; statutory references. 
(A)	As histories for the Code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the Code section. Example: (Ord. No. 10, 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, 1-1-1985) 
(B)	(1)	If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70) (Ord. No. 10, 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, 1-1-1985) 
(2)	If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example: 
Sec. 39.01 Public records available. 
This county shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law. 
State Law reference— For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
Sec. 10.16 - Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities. 
(A)	All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this Code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This Code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this Code. 
(B)	The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued. Punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this Code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this Code had not been enacted. 
Sec. 10.99 - General penalty. 
(A)	Any such violation, upon conviction thereof, as prescribed by the laws of Georgia, shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the maximum fine or the maximum imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by the pertinent laws of Georgia, as such laws (see O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b)) now exist or as they may hereafter be amended; however, in no case shall the maximum punishment for any one violation exceed the maximum punishment as provided by the pertinent laws of Georgia in effect and existing at the time of such violation. (The maximum punishment which may now, at the effective date of the enactment of this Code section, be imposed under and by virtue of the pertinent laws of Georgia, being O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b), shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both, which such maximum amount of the fine or the maximum number of days imprisonment, or both, may hereafter be changed, increased or decreased, from time to time, by the enactment of an amendment, or amendments, to the pertinent laws of Georgia.) 
(B)	The imposition of any such fine or imprisonment, or both, for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such violators shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within the time as prescribed by the court having jurisdiction of such matter, and, in the absence of any such completion time being fixed by the court, within a reasonable time after such violations occur. 
(C)	The application of any fine, imprisonment or other penalty shall not be construed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or to postpone any action required. 
(D)	The remedies herein set out for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be cumulative of all other remedies, civil or criminal, provided by the laws of Georgia or by the ordinances of Clay County. 
(E)	Violations of this section shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Clay County, Georgia pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
TITLE III - ADMINISTRATION 
Chapter 30 - COUNTY OFFICIALS 
DIVISION 1. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 30.01 - Office created. 
The office of County Administrator of Clay County is created by the enactment of this division. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.02 - Appointment; restrictions. 
The County Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board of Commissioners of Clay County to serve at the pleasure of the Board for an indefinite term. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.03 - Qualifications. 
The County Administrator shall be chosen by the Board solely upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with specific reference to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices with respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this section. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.04 - Removal. 
(A)	The County Administrator may be removed by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board of Commissioners. The reason(s) for the removal shall be set forth in writing and provided to the County Administrator within 48 hours of the vote. The County Administrator shall be entitled to severance pay as outlined in the employment agreement executed by the County Administrator and the county. In the event no such agreement exists, the County Administrator shall receive severance pay equal to four weeks of base salary. No severance pay shall be provided to the County Administrator if the termination is for reason of any one the following: 
(1)	Conviction of a felony;
(2)	If it has been documented on at least two occasions within a six-month period, that the County Administrator has refused and/or consistently failed to perform his or her duties outlined in § 30.08, Duties. Failure to perform shall be documented in the form of written warnings from the Board of Commissioners or the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners; 
(3)	If it has been documented on at least two occasions within a six-month period, that the County Administrator has violated the "Grounds for Dismissal" and/or "Code of Conduct" section of the County Personnel Policy. Violations of the Code of Conduct and Grounds for Dismissal shall be documented in the form of written warnings from the Board of Commissioners or the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners; 
(4)	Job abandonment or not resigning in good standing as defined in the Clay County Personnel Policies paragraph 32.7.1(C) - Resignation; 
(5)	Falsifying employment history resume or misrepresenting employment history to the Board of Commissioners; 
(6)	Failure to immediately turn in all keys to a Commissioner or the County Clerk;
(7)	Failure to immediately turn in all written and electronic passwords.
(B)	Regarding subsections (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(5) above, the County Administrator shall be afforded the same rights granted to other Clay County employees as allowed by the grievance procedures set forth in the Clay County Personnel Policy. 
(C)	Nothing in this section shall prevent or interfere with the right of the Board of Commissioners to terminate the services of the County Administrator at any time, subject only to the above provisions. 
(D)	With a separation event, all locks with keys currently/previously held by the County Administrator shall be changed and all passwords shall be secured in the County office safe. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993; Ord. No. 05-114, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 12-001, §§ 2, 3, 4-17-2012)
Sec. 30.05 - Compensation. 
The County Administrator shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, which shall be subject to adjustment annually based on an annual performance evaluation by the full Board. The County Administrator shall receive all across-the-board cost of living allowances and across-the-board wage and salary increases awarded to county employees and shall receive, at a minimum, all employee benefits provided to county employees generally. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.06 - Acting county administrator. 
By letter filed with the County Clerk, the County Administrator shall designate a county officer or employee as Acting County Administrator to exercise the powers and perform the duties of County Administrator during the County Administrator's temporary absence or disability, to include the countersigning of all county checks. The Board of Commissioners may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the county to serve as Acting County Administrator during the County Administrator's temporary absence or disability. In the event the position of County Administrator becomes vacant, the Board of Commissioners may appoint an Acting County Administrator to temporarily exercise the powers and perform the duties of County Administrator pending appointment of a new County Administrator. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.07 - Official bonds. 
The County Administrator and any Acting County Administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the Board of Commissioners of Clay County in the amount of $25,000.00, and the premium therefore shall be paid by Clay County. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.08 - Duties. 
(A)	The County Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the County of Clay. 
(B)	He or she shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners of Clay County for the proper administration of the affairs of the county, as provided herein, and it shall be his or her duty: 
(1)	To see that all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by county officers or department heads are faithfully executed; 
(2)	To attend all meetings of the Board, with the right to take part in the discussions in accordance with any rules adopted by the Board of Commissioners, but having no vote. The County Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(3)	To prepare and submit to the Board a proposed annual budget and a proposed capital program and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the Board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the Board; 
(4)	To examine regularly at periods fixed by the Board the accounts, records and operations of every county board, commission, department, office and agency which receive appropriations from the said Board; to make monthly reports to the said Board on county fiscal and other affairs; to keep the said Board fully advised on the financial conditions and future needs of the county; and to make such recommendations on county affairs as he or she deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county; 
(5)	To submit to the said Board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the preceding year; 
(6)	To confer with and advise all other elected or appointed officials of the county who are not under the immediate control of the said Board, but who receive financial support from said Board; 
(7)	To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the county and supervise and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for the county within such limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Board; 
(8)	To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county for which the Board has responsibility and to direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and the construction, maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings, landfill, garbage collection and other public works and the care and maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the county; 
(9)	To appoint, and when in his or her discretion the welfare of the county requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the Board is responsible, except the County Attorney who shall be appointed directly by the Board. The County Administrator may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within that department; 
(10)	To fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the county, subject, however, to budget appropriations and supervision and control by the Board; 
(11)	To supervise the programs of financial management, personnel administration, procurement and risk management; 
(12)	To countersign all checks on county funds signed by the Chairperson or other commissioner of the Board. This provision shall be subject to the County Administrator and commissioner(s) having executed the depository agreement with the financial institution upon which checks shall be drawn. The County Administrator shall also receive and disburse all the public funds of the County of Clay, as herein provided and is now provided by law; and 
(13)	To perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Board.
(Res. of 8-3-1993; Res. No. 11-010, § (a), 3-15-2011)
Sec. 30.09 - Performance of duties. 
The County Administrator shall perform his or her duties under the direction of the Board of Commissioners and shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a body. No member of the Board of Commissioners shall individually direct the County Administrator or attempt to interfere in the performance of his or her duties, and the Board of Commissioners shall, except for the purpose of formal inquiries and investigations, deal with county employees subject to the County Administrator's direction or supervision solely through the County Administrator. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.10 - Budget development. 
(A)	The County Administrator shall, no later than the last day of the seventh month of each fiscal year, submit to the Board of Commissioners a budget plan and calendar for developing a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year; the County Administrator shall formulate and submit to the Board of Commissioners, no later than the last day of the tenth month of each fiscal year, a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
(B)	The County Administrator's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the county for the ensuring fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the county's debt position and include such other material as the County Administrator deems desirable. The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all county funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law, shall be in such form as the County Administrator deems desirable or the Board of Commissioners may require. The proposed budget shall, at a minimum, include a clear general summary of its contents and show in detail all estimated income indicating the proposed property tax levy and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections: 
(1)	Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and 
(2)	The anticipated income and expense and surplus or deficit for the ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund operated by the county. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.11 - Capital program development. 
(A)	The County Administrator shall consult with the heads of county departments, constitutional officers and the County Planning Commission and shall prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners a proposed five-year capital program each year. It shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners by the County Administrator simultaneously with submission of the proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(B)	The capital program shall include:
(1)	A clear general summary of its contents;
(2)	A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each; 
(3)	Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure; 
(4)	Method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant; and
(5)	The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
Sec. 30.12 - Community planning and development. 
The County Administrator, subject to supervision by the Board of Commissioners, shall: 
(A)	Develop plans and programs to advance the health, safety, general welfare and physical and economic development of the county and shall pursue grants-in-aid that may be available from time to time to help finance implementation of such programs; 
(B)	Monitor the county's planning activities, including those undertaken in response to the Georgia Planning Act and the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act; and 
(C)	Cooperate with and coordinate the community improvement activities of independent authorities and agencies, county constitutional offices, the County Planning Commission and county departments and other organizational components of the county government as necessary. 
(Res. of 8-3-1993)
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN EMPLOYEES AND COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 30.13 - Communications between employees and Commissioners. 
(A)	The Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia, shall establish as its policy that all direct or indirect requests to the department heads, or county employees or contacts by an individual commissioner be directed to the immediate supervisor, and the supervisor shall forward same to the County Administrator for reply or compliance. In such event and at the discretion of the County Administrator, the County Administrator may decline the request until such is presented for approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
(B)	Individual commissioners shall refrain from making direct requests or demands with county employees and shall direct all requests through the County Administrator. 
(C)	Such action or actions by the County Administrator, department heads, or county employees, shall not be considered as insubordinate nor shall such compliance be actionable by the Board of Commissioners provided the employee presents to the immediate supervisor a written report within 24 hours describing the contact or request for compliance. 
(Res. No. 08-016, 3-18-2008; Res. No. 10-082, § 1, 11-2-2010)
DIVISION 3. - RECORDS CUSTODIAN 

Sec. 30.14. - Records Custodian. 
(A)	The Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia, shall establish a Records Custodian for the benefit of the county to assist the Board of Commissioners in accomplishing a coordinated method to respond to requests for public records. 
(B)	The Records Custodian shall be the County Administrator as appointed by the Board of Commissioners. All requests, whether to an employee of the county, County Commissioner, or County Attorney, for public records pursuant to the Open Records Law for the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, shall be immediately presented to the Records Custodian for the coordinated response for the Board of Commissioners as required by law. 
(Res. No. 08-017, 3-4-2008)
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY LEGISLATIVE COORDINATOR (CLC) 

Sec. 30.15. - County Legislative Coordinator appointed. 
(A)	Legislative decisions made by the Georgia General Assembly increasingly impact county governments. 
(B)	The Association County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) monitors and reports on legislative proposals on a regular basis during and after each legislative session. 
(C)	ACCG regularly seeks input and comment from county officials and staff in assessing the impact of legislative proposals and in developing responses to such proposals. 
(D)	To ensure an effective and accurate response, there must be a process whereby reports from ACCG and requests from ACCG for information or analysis of legislative proposals are directed to the most appropriate county officials or staff for a response. 
(E)	To most effectively respond to legislative proposals affecting counties, there shall be one county official or staff person designated by the board of commissioners to serve as the County Legislative Coordinator (CLC) for Clay County. The CLC for Clay County shall have the following: 
(1)	Access to all department heads and county officials to obtain information and data.
(2)	Access to the members of the board of commissioners.
(3)	Working knowledge of county operations.
(4)	The ability and time to respond to requests for information from ACCG policy staff in a timely manner. 
(5)	Authority within the county government structure to request and receive timely responses to requests for information. 
(6)	Knowledge of the various departments within the county and the points of contact within each to obtain information and feedback. 
(7)	Ability to provide periodic reports to the members of the board of commissioners and other county officials regarding the legislative reports and activities of ACCG. 
(Res. No. 10-084, 11-16-2010)
Chapter 31 - DEPARTMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 31.01 - Clay County Development Authority. 
(A)	There is created a body of corporate and politic in Clay County to be known as the Clay County Development Authority, hereinafter referred to as the Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Clay County and a public corporation. 
(B)	The Authority shall consist of not less than seven nor more than nine members. Members of the Authority shall be appointed by a majority of the Clay County Board of Commissioners. Four shall be appointed for initial terms of two years and the remaining members shall be appointed for initial terms of four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified; thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the Authority in any manner. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. 
(C)	The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Clay County. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not include the exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
(D)	The powers of the Authority shall include, but not limited to, the power:
(1)	To buy, acquire, develop, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor and lessee and mortgage land, buildings and property of all kinds within the limits of Clay County; 
(2)	To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts;
(3)	To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or promising to operate any industrial plant or establishment within Clay County which in the judgment of the Authority will be a benefit to the people of the county. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the Authority; 
(4)	To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates therefore, to execute trust agreements or indentures and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefore; 
(5)	To contract with Clay County and other political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(6)	To have and exercise usual powers of private corporation except such as are inconsistent with this section, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the Authority and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the Authority; 
(7)	To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industry, agriculture, trade and commerce and the facilities therefore in Clay County and to make long-range plans therefore, to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Clay County suitable for and intended for use as a retirement facility, factory, mill shop, processing plant, assembly plant or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. The acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building or building under construction and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, completing of construction, furnishing and equipping of such building. No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the Authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than 30 years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the propose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the Authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking; 
(8)	To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(9)	To designate officers to sign and act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(10)	To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the Authority as herein stated. 
(E)	The Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Clay County. 
(F)	The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority when in performance of the work of the Authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the state. The Authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the Authority. 
(G)	The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services of the Authority. 
(H)	In addition to the purpose for which revenue bonds are now permitted to be issued, the Authority, with the consent of the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, to carry out public purposes is authorized to issue revenue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest not to exceed 8% and maturing at the years and amount determined by the Authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as heretofore or hereafter amended Ga. Code Ann. Supp. Ch. 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued there under, provided, however, that any property, real or personal of the Authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the Authority. The Authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this section to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the Authority upon default on such bonds, either in payment of principle or interest or under any term or conditions under which such bonds are issued. 
(I)	The property of the Authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the Authority and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the Authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
(J)	This section is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare of Clay County and its citizens, industry, agriculture and trade within the County of Clay and making long range plans for such development and expansion and this section and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. 
(K)	This section shall be effective immediately and the first members of the Authority shall be appointed within 30 days. 
(L)	The Clay County Board of Commissioners may further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and exercise thereof and may enlarge and restrict the same and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority. The Authority shall be an instrumentality of Clay County, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within Clay County. 
(M)	There shall be no limitations upon the amount of debt which the Authority may incur, but no debt created by the Authority shall be a debt of Clay County or the state. 
(N)	In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other divisions, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this section, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the division, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. 
(O)	A copy of this section shall be filed with the Secretary of State.
(Res. of 6-20-2000)
Sec. 31.02 - Economic Development Council. 
(A)	Name and purpose. 
(1)	Name. The name of this organization shall be Clay County Economic Development Council. 
(2)	Purpose. This Council is organized as a nonprofit organization for the purpose of correlating and strengthening the economic conditions of Clay County and improving the well-being of its citizens by coordinated and harmonious development in the county. 
(B)	Membership. 
(1)	Members. The Clay County Economic Development Council shall consist of ten members. Members shall be appointed by the Clay County Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the EDC. Membership should, to the greatest extent possible, include representation by one or more persons from: 
(a)	Clay County Board of Commissioners.
(b)	City Council of the City of Fort Gaines.
(c)	Clay County School System.
(d)	Clay County/Fort Gaines Development Authority.
(e)	The medical community.
(f)	The agricultural community.
(g)	Local businesses.
(h)	The county at large by individuals who have a vital interest in the economic growth and development of Clay County. 
The term of the members shall be four years. Vacancies in membership shall be filled by the appointing authority with appointments being made in September for membership beginning October 1. The Economic Development Council shall make recommendations to the appointing authority for candidates to fill such vacancies except for representatives of the City of Fort Gaines, Clay County School System, and Clay County/Fort Gaines Development Authority. Recommendations of candidates for representation of the City of Fort Gaines, Clay County School System, and the Clay County/Fort Gaines Development Authority will be made by the represented body. Members representing the City of Fort Gaines, Clay County School System, Clay County/Fort Gaines Development Authority, the medical community and the agricultural community will be (re)appointed during the even years divisible by four. Members representing the Clay County Board of Commissioners, local business and the county at large will be (re)appointed in even years not evenly divided by four. 
(2)	Attendance. If a member is absent from three regular monthly meetings of the Council during a 12-month period, that member shall be removed from the Council. The Chairman shall notify the appointing authority and request that a new appointment be made. Absences for health or business conflicts shall not be counted. 
(3)	Meetings. This Council shall meet at 12:30 p.m. the first Monday of each month at a location designated by the Chairman. Special meetings may be called as necessary. The Council may change the time and place of meetings with prior notification to all members and the appointing authority. 
(4)	Voting rights. Each member shall have the right of one vote on matters pertaining to the business of this Council. 
(5)	Quorum. A quorum shall be one-half of the membership, or five members, whichever is greater. A quorum shall be present at any regular or special meeting in order to transact business. 
(6)	Proxies. No member shall be entitled to vote by proxy for another member. 
(7)	Voting. Each member shall be entitled to one vote upon each matter submitted to a vote at a meeting. A majority vote by the members present must be received for a matter to be passed. Votes may be received by fax or e-mail from members and shall be addressed to the Secretary. These voting members shall be counted toward a quorum. All elections shall be by ballot unless waived by the unanimous consent of those members present. 
(C)	Officers. 
(1)	Number. The officers of this Council shall be a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, Secretary, and Treasurer, each of whom shall be elected by the members. 
(2)	Election of officers. Officers will be elected at the regular monthly meeting in September of each year. The Chairman will appoint a nominating committee at the regular monthly meeting in August. The nominating committee will submit nominations for each office at the September meeting. Other nominations may be received from the members present. The term of office shall be October 1 through September 30. In the event an officer can not fulfill their term of office for any reason, a special election will be held to fill the unexpired term. 
(3)	Qualifications. The officers shall be members of this Council in good standing. 
(4)	Chairman. The Chairman shall be chief executive officer of this Council. He/She shall preside at all meetings of the members, and shall have general charge of the business of this Council, subject to the approval and control of the members. 
(5)	Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairman shall, in the absence of the Chairman, exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Chairman; otherwise he/she shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned by the Chairman. 
(6)	Secretary. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the meetings of the members, shall attend to the giving of all required notices, and shall perform all duties incident to the office of Secretary. 
(7)	Treasurer. The Treasurer shall keep a full and accurate account of the receipts and disbursements; deposit all money, checks and other obligations to the credit of this Council in such depository of depositories as may be designated by the members; disburse the funds of this Council as ordered, taking proper vouchers for such disbursements; render a statement of account and transactions whenever required; make a complete annual statement in September of each year at the regular meeting; and generally perform all the duties incident to the position of Treasurer. The Treasurer's books shall be audited annually in conjunction with the audit of the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(D)	Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)	Fiscal year. The fiscal year of this Council shall begin on the first day of October and terminate on the last day of September in each year. 
(2)	Order of business. The order of business at all meetings, insofar as possible, shall be as follows: 
(a)	Call to order.
(b)	Roll call.
(c)	Reading of minutes.
(d)	Report of Treasurer.
(e)	Report of committees.
(f)	Unfinished business.
(g)	New business.
(h)	Election and appointments.
(i)	Special programs.
(j)	Adjournment.
(3)	Conduct of business. To insure a coordinated and harmonious effort by the Council, no member shall conduct business in the name of the Council without Council approval. 
(4)	Committees. The Chairman shall appoint all standing and special committees. The Chairman and Secretary shall be members, ex-officio, thereof. 
(5)	Contributions. This Council may receive, at the discretion of its members, voluntary contributions in the support of its program of work and activities, and for special purposes. 
(6)	Investments of funds. Investment of Council funds, within the limitations of law, may be authorized, from time to time by the members. 
(7)	Remuneration. Members and officers shall serve without remuneration as such, but may be reimbursed at the discretion of the members to cover necessary expense of travel and subsistence when serving this Council. 
(E)	Amendment of by-laws. Recommendations that these by-laws be amended, repealed or altered may be made at any regular meeting of the members of this Council, or at any special meeting of such members called for that purpose, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present in quorum, due notice of such meeting having been given, provided such proposed amendment shall be included in the notice of any such special meeting. All amendments to these by-laws must be approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-5-1985; Res. No. 08-013, arts. I—V, 1-15-2008)
Sec. 31.03 - Recreational Department and Recreation Commission. 
(A)	Under the provisions of the Georgia Recreation Enabling Law, approved February 1, 1946, (Ga. L. 152), and amended in 1955, 1964 and 1971, there is hereby established a City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Department. This Department shall be governed by a commission established and known as the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission. 
(B)	The City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members, three members to be approved by the City Council of the City of Fort Gaines, three members to be approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners and the last member to be selected by the members of the Recreation Commission themselves. This Commission shall serve without pay. 
(C)	The term of office for member's of the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall be for five years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members first appointed shall be appointed for such terms so that the term of at least one member shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by another appointment by the members of the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission subject to approval by the City Council or County Commission, depending upon the original appointment of the vacant seat. 
(D)	Upon appointment, the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall meet and organize by electing one of its own as Chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary. The Commission shall have power to adopt by-laws and rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city and county subject to approval of the city and county. 
(E)	The City of Fort Games-Clay County Recreation Commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city and the county. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof and on private properties with consent of the owners. 
(F)	The City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as Recreation Director who is trained or properly qualified for the work and such other personnel as the Commission deems proper. 
(G)	Annually, the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall submit a budget to the City Council and County Commission for approval. The amount of funding submitted annually by the city and the county shall be negotiated annually and contractually agreed upon by both the city and county. In addition to the funds appropriated by the City Council and County Commission, the Recreation Commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money, other personal or real property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use, for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. However, if the acceptance of any gift or bequest for such purposes shall subject the City Council and/or the County Commission to liability or additional expense for improvements, maintenance or renewal, the acceptance of any grant or devise of any property shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and the County Commission. 
(H)	All monies received by appropriation or otherwise shall be deposited to the account of the City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission. The City of Fort Gaines-Clay County Recreation Commission shall make an annual report to the City Council and the County Commission at the conclusion of each budget year and such other reports as deemed necessary from time to time. 
(Res. No. 99-02, 3-9-1999)
DIVISION 2. - CLAY COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 07-009, adopted April 3, 2007, amended Division 2 by changing references to the Fort Gaines-Clay County Planning Commission to Clay County Planning and Zoning Commission.

Sec. 31.20 - Membership. 
(A)	(1) The Clay County Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members as follows: 
(a)	Three of the members shall be residents of the City of Fort Gaines appointed by the Fort Gaines City Council; and 
(b)	Three of the members shall be residents of Clay County appointed by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)	The seventh member shall be mutually approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners and the Fort Gaines City Council and shall serve as the member at large. 
(d)	The Clay County Extension Director shall serve as an advisor to the Commission.
(2)	The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first Clay County Planning and Zoning Commission under the terms of this section one of the county-appointed members shall be appointed for a term of two years and two for terms of four years. 
(B)	Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All appointees must reside in and represent the area served by the appointing local government. Inability to serve, or failure to serve the appointive position for a period not in excess of 60 days, may result in the reappointment of an individual capable of maintaining the responsibilities of the office. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 5-5-1987; Res. of 4-3-2007)
Sec. 31.21 - Organization, rules, staff, finances. 
(A)	The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointive members. The term of the Chairperson shall be for one year with eligibility for re-election. However, the Chairperson shall not be reelected to more than three concurrent terms of office. The Planning Commission shall appoint a Secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality or the county. 
(B)	The Commission shall meet as deemed necessary. The Commission shall adopt a set of by-laws; however, these by-laws must be approved by the Clay County Commission and the Fort Gaines City Council. All meetings of the Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the Commission shall be public record. 
(C)	The Commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with State Planning Agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. If these employees, staff or contracts with other agencies require financial expenditures, they must first be approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners and the Fort Gaines City Council. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts to the Commission, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authority of the city and county. 
(Res. of 5-5-1987)
Sec. 31.22 - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies, or participate with agencies in making said surveys and studies, of existing conditions and probable future development and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public welfare and prosperity, as well as the efficiency and economy in the development of the entire Clay County, Georgia area. 
(Res. of 5-5-1987)
Chapter 32 - PERSONNEL POLICIES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32.01 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 32.01, which pertained to the adoption by reference of the personnel management system and was derived from a resolution passed March 1, 1994, and Ord. 04-108, adopted April 6, 2004, has been deleted as having been superseded by Ord. 06-002, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, which adopted a new personnel policy. The personnel policy is included as §§ 32.21—32.46 of this chapter. 
Sec. 32.02 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 32.02, which pertained to the adoption by reference of the employee substance abuse policy and was derived from a resolution passed Feb. 6, 2001, has been deleted as having been superseded by Ord. 06-002, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, which adopted an employee substance abuse policy as part of a new personnel policy. The employee substance abuse policy is included as § 32.39 of this chapter. 
Sec. 32.03 - Clay County Transit System Substance Abuse Policy adopted by reference. 
The Clay County Transit System Substance Abuse Policy, copies of which are on file in the office of the Chairperson, are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Res. of 7-2-1996; Res. No. 06-019, 11-7-2006)
Sec. 32.04 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 32.04, which pertained to the adoption by reference of the nonharassment policy and was derived from a resolution passed March 6, 2001, has been deleted as having been superseded by Ord. 06-002, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, which adopted a nonharassment policy as part of a new personnel policy. The nonharassment policy is included as § 32.40 of this chapter. 
Sec. 32.05 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 32.05, which pertained to the adoption by reference of the policy against violence in the workplace and was derived from a resolution passed March 6, 2001, has been deleted as having been superseded by Ord. 06-002, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, which adopted a policy against violence in the workplace as part of a new personnel policy. The policy against violence in the workplace is included as § 32.41 of this chapter. 
Sec. 32.06 - Compensation. 
The Board of Commissioners of Clay County shall be compensated at the rate as specified as the minimum rate of compensation for said service but not less than $40.00 per day, and no payments for service will be rendered for Board meetings until minutes of the meeting are provided to the governing authority documenting attendance and work progress of the meeting. 
(Res. of 2-5-2002)
Editor's note— For local legislation regarding compensation of the Chairperson and members of the Board, and the selection of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, see LC 9 0187 effective 1-1-2001. 
Sec. 32.07 - Worker's compensation. 
Elected officials shall be covered under the Association County Commissions of Georgia Group Self-Insured Worker's Compensation Fund while performing their duties as the Board of Commissioners, Sheriff, Probate Judge, Clerk of Court, Magistrate and Tax Commissioner shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the State of Georgia as stated in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1. 
(Res. of 2-1-2000)
Sec. 32.08 - Employee's retirement system of Georgia. 
(A)	This county, by and through its lawfully constituted Board of Commissioners, does adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservation, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto appertaining of Title II of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. 401 et seq. as amended by Pub. L. 761, 83rd Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and instrumentalities, save and except any of such officers and employees who occupy any position, office or any employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(B)	There shall be withheld from any salary or compensation due any such officer or employee not excepted as aforesaid whose compensation qualifies him or her to participation therein the percentage of salary, wage or compensation required to be withheld by the Act, whether such compensation be computed in case, quarters, subsistence or in kind and reserved in the Treasury for remittance in accordance with the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(C)	There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable federal/state laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses and such funds shall be paid in accordance with laws and regulations. 
(D)	The rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of the Act shall be adhered to and that reports relating to personnel, payrolls and otherwise required by the state agency shall be promptly made and that remittance of the tax on the employer and the employee shall be promptly paid in accordance with federal/state laws and regulations. 
(E)	The County Administrator is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the tax upon the county, and the County Administrator is made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purpose of this section. 
(F)	This county, accordingly and by the adoption of a resolution, in full and ample manner by its lawfully constituted Board of Commissioners, does authorize the Chairperson to make and enter into agreement with the State of Georgia, by and through its designated agency, the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, in full accord with this section and the Social Security Act, as amended, and so afford its benefits to the officers and employees of this county and its instrumentalities, if any, to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by the law provided, namely, Probate Judges Retirement Fund. 
(Res. of 6-15-1999)
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of Sept. 2, 2008, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. For purposes of classification and clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. II. Former div. 2, §§ 32.21—32.46, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-002, revised and adopted Jan. 17, 2006.

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32.1.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish standards of policy and procedures, which will serve as a guide for employees and define administrative actions concerning specific personnel activities. They are intended to indicate the customary and most reasonable methods whereby the aims of the Clay County Personnel Policy may be carried out. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.2 - Scope. 
These policies and procedures shall cover all employees in the county service except those classified as exempt. Exempt employees shall include: 
Members of the Board of Commissioners and other elected County Officers or Officials. 
A.	Constitutional Officers and their directly appointed staffs, except that, by written agreement between the Commission and any Constitutional Officer, such staffs may be subject to certain provisions herein. 
B.	County Administrator, unless specifically included.
C.	Members of appointed or elected Boards, Commissions, Authorities and Committees.
D.	County Attorney and County Auditor.
E.	Engineering and other Consultants.
F.	Persons employed to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, investigation, or examination on behalf of the Board of Commissioners or a committee thereof. 
G.	All temporary and seasonal positions unless specifically covered by action of the Board of Commissioners and except as otherwise set forth in Division 11, Grievances and Appeals. 
H.	Any covered employee to the extent these policies are prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.3 - Clay County Management Chart. 
The Clay County Management Chart depicting the lines of authority and control between and among the various departments and levels of each department as approved by the County Commission is hereby attached and made a part hereof as Attachment A. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.4 - Policies enacted by reference. 
The following personnel management policies hereby made a part of this article are incorporated by reference, and are attached [to the ordinance from which this article derives] as Attachment B through J: 
Attachment B — Employee Substance Abuse Policy; 
Attachment C — Clay County Non-Harassment Policy; 
Attachment D — Clay County Policy Against Violence in the Workplace; 
Attachment E — Clay County Workers Compensation Procedure; 
Attachment F — Clay County Personnel Orientation Checklist; 
Attachment G — Clay County Vacation Request Form; 
Attachment H — Travel Reimbursement Form; 
Attachment I — Evaluation of Motor Vehicle Records for County Employees; 
Attachment J — Employee Acceptance Form. 
Upon initial approval and signing of Clay County Personnel Policy, each county employee shall receive a copy of the policy. Each employee will complete the employee acceptance form (last page of the policy manual) included in the policy acknowledging he/she has read and will abide by said policy. All new employees will receive the policy upon hiring as part of the personnel hiring process. Newly employed Clay County Personnel will also sign the employee acceptance form. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.5 - Fair employment practices. 
It is the policy of the county to hire and develop those individuals acceptable for employment by virtue of their qualifications regardless of race, creed, national origin, sex or age. The county regards quality of performance on the job as a significant contributing factor for placement, promotion and salary increases. 
The following guidelines will be used in implementing fair employment practices: 
A.	No one is to be denied employment, promotion or salary increase based on sex, age, race, creed or national origin. 
B.	Employment recruiting must not indicate any preference for age or sex unless such restrictions indicate a bonafide occupational qualification for the job classification in question. In no case may a preference for race, creed or national origin be indicated. 
C.	Differences in salary ranges shall not exist for work responsibilities requiring equal skill, education, experience, and effort. Specifically, no difference in pay shall exist solely based on age, sex, creed, race or national origin. 
Clay County complies with the Equal Employment Opportunity Program in accordance with 28 C.F.R., 42.301, the Fair Labor Standards Act contained in 29 C.F.R., and all other applicable statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.6 - Administration. 
The Office of the County Administrator shall be the Personnel Office, and the County Administrator shall be the Personnel Officer. The Personnel Officer shall have control over such records as are stipulated in this policy. Unless otherwise stipulated, the County Administrator shall be the final administrative authority on all matters regarding personnel. In the absence of the County Administrator, the County Clerk shall carry out the duties set forth herein except for duties requiring disciplinary action or dismissal. In the absence of the County Administrator, such actions shall be administered by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.7 - Amendment of personnel policy. 
1.7.1 By resolution: These policies may be amended at any meeting of the Board of Commissioners by adoption of any appropriate amendment. 
1.7.2 Proposed amendments: 
A.	Amendments may be initiated by any member of the Board of Commissioners or the County Administrator. 
B.	The County Administrator shall coordinate with the County Attorney's Office to finalize the proposed amendment prior to presentment to the County Commission. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.8 - Neutral language. 
In keeping with the intent and purposes of the Clay County Personnel Policy, when the term "he" or "she", or its grammatical equivalent, is used herein, the term shall be deemed to include both male and female genders. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.1.9 - Headings. 
All chapter titles, section headings and captions are for the convenience of reference only and neither limits, nor amplifies any provision, right or entitlement provided by these policies. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 32.2 - [Defined terms.] 
Appeal. An application for review of a grievance. 
Administrative leave. See Suspension. 
Applicant. An individual who has completed and submitted an application for employment with the county. 
Appointing authority. The official who has the ultimate authority to hire or fire a County Officer's employee. The term shall include the County Officer and shall include all deputies of a County Officer who are authorized to impose adverse action upon a County Officer's employee. Further, the term shall include all Officials with the authority to hire and fire employees under their control when the authority is derived from the Board of Commissioners. 
Appointment. The offer by the county, and acceptance by an applicant, of a position of employment with the county. 
Base pay. The regular pay for the position without including overtime, holiday pay, temporary pay or any other pay. 
Board of Commissioners. The duly elected Board of Commissioners of Clay County. 
Child. A biological child, adopted child, foster child, stepchild, legal ward of an employee, or a child for which the employee is standing in loco parentis, who is either: 
a.	Under 18 years of age; or
b.	Eighteen years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of mental or physical disability. 
Classification. The act of grouping positions in classes with regard to duties and responsibilities, and requirements as to education, knowledge, experience and ability. 
Classification plan. The official system of grouping positions into appropriate classes. 
Class specification (job description). A written description of a class, consisting of class title, a general statement of the level of work, distinguishing features of the work, and examples of duties and qualifications. 
Compensation. The standard rates of pay, which have been established for the respective classes, as set forth in the compensation plan. 
Compensation plan. The official schedule of pay assigning rates of pay to each class title; the pay schedule. 
Confidential information. Confidential information includes, but is not limited to, computer access password, sealed bid data, medical records and similar files, Social Security Number, home address of law enforcement officers, judges, prosecutors, and or identification of their immediate family members or any other information that may be defined by federal, state or county law. 
Constitutional Officers. Elected officials not a part of the Clay County Governing Body. For the purposes herein, these shall include the Sheriff, Clerk of Superior Court, Magistrate, Probate Judge, Tax Commissioner and Coroner. 
Constitutional Officer's employee. An employee who is hired by a Constitutional Officer. 
County. Clay County, A political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
County Administrator. The Chief Administrative Officer of the County appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The authority of County Administrator shall be governed by § 30.01 through § 30.12, as codified by the Clay County Code of Ordinances. Notwithstanding any personnel policy provision in conflict herewith, § 30.01 through § 30.12 shall control and govern the County Administrator. 
County bulletin board. A message board located in the entryway of the Clay County Board of Commissioners Offices for the express purpose of posting vital information such as employment postings, labor law notices, notice of special or called meetings, etc. 
County employees. Employees who are hired pursuant to authority granted by the Board of Commissioners. 
Covered employee. An employee whose employment is subject to the Policies and Procedures of the Clay County Personnel Policy. 
Covered position. A position subject to the Policies and Procedures of the Clay County Personnel Policy. 
Demotion. Assignment of an employee from one class to another, which has a lower maximum rate of pay; or, reduction within a pay grade to a lower step. 
Department. All separate and distinct divisions of Clay County Government, as established by the Board of Commissioners. 
Department director or department head. The person designated by the County Administrator who has the responsibility and authority to manage and operate a division for and on behalf of Clay County. 
Dismissal. Separation from county employment with cause; see also "Removal". 
Elected or appointed official. The same as defined in "Appointing Authority" herein. 
Employee. An individual who is employed by the county, and is compensated through the county payroll; those paid on a fee basis and individual contractors are not included as employees. 
Exempt employee. A covered employee who is exempt from the overtime provisions of the FLSA. 
Fiscal year. The counties adopted operating year from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
FLSA. The Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C.S. §§ 201 et seq. 
FMLA. The Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C.S. §§ 2601 et seq. 
FMLA leave. Leave taken by an eligible employee for a serious health condition of the employee or the employee's immediate family for a period not to exceed 12 workweeks or equivalent shifts in a calendar year, pursuant to the FMLA. 
Full-time. A covered employee serving in an annually funded position and working a minimum of 35 hours per week. 
Health care provider. A doctor of medicine, doctor of chiropractic, doctor of osteopathy, podiatrist, dentist, clinical psychologist, optometrist, nurse practitioner or nurse midwife, legally authorized to practice under the laws of the State of Georgia and performing within the scope of their practice. The term shall also include a Christian Science Practitioner listed with the First Church of Christ, Scientist in Boston, Massachusetts. 
Illegal drugs. Marijuana/cannabinoids (THC), cocaine, amphetamines/methamphetamine, opiates or phencyclidine (PCP). The term illegal drug shall not include any drug when used pursuant to a valid prescription or when used as otherwise authorized by state or federal law. 
Immediate family. The use of this term shall include spouse, including common-law as defined by the court, children, parents, siblings, father or mother-in-law, grandparents, or any relative residing in the same household. 
Improper use of alcohol and other drugs, "improper drug use", or "improper use of other drugs". The use of or taking of alcohol or an otherwise legal drug in a way that constitutes a crime under state law, or which impairs the individual's ability to perform the duties of the job; or creates a safety hazard to the individual, other employees or the general public. 
In loco parentis. As being by court order, an employee who is standing in the place of a parent and who has the rights, duties and responsibilities to care for and financially support a child. No biological relationship is necessary. 
Insufficiency. The lack of the qualities required for effectively performing the job duties as outlined in the class specifications; this may include physical, mental or emotional insufficiency. 
Insubordination. The unwillingness of an employee to submit to the authority vested in the department head by the County Administrator, or vested in the County Administrator by the County Commission. 
Job classification. A group of positions, which is sufficiently alike in general duties and responsibilities, and requirements as to education, knowledge, experience and ability to warrant the use for the same title, class specification and pay range. 
Lay-off. The involuntary nondisciplinary separation of an employee due to a change in a class, elimination of a position, or a shortage of money with which to fund a position, lack of work, act of nature (violent weather damages) or other causes deemed by the County Commission. 
Management. The person or persons who control or direct the county business. 
May. The word "may" shall be interpreted as permissive. 
Negligence. The failure to exercise responsible and prudent judgment in the performance of an employee's job duties. 
Net credited service date. Date employee was hired. In case of more than one employee having the same NCSD, the date of the employee's application for the position shall take precedence. 
Nonexempt employee. A covered employee who is entitled to overtime pay under the provisions of the FLSA. 
Overtime. Overtime as defined under the provisions of the FLSA. 
Parent. The biological or legal parent, stepparent or guardian of a child or the biological or legal parent or stepparent of an employee or an employee's spouse. 
Part-time. A covered employee serving in an annually funded position of less than 35 hours per pay period and eligible for prorated benefits except health insurance, disability and pension, based on budgeted hours compared to a full-time position. 
Pay range. The difference between the minimum and maximum pay rates assigned to a class as the compensation for that class. 
Pay rate. A specific dollar amount of pay, expresses as an hourly rate for wage earners, or an annual rate for salaried employees. 
Performance evaluation. A report relative to the job performance and capacity of an employee, as made by his/her supervisor. 
Position. An office of employment, whether occupied or vacant, full- or part-time, consisting of duties and responsibilities assigned to one individual. 
Probationary employee. A full- or part-time employee serving a probationary period prior to final appointment in that class, who shall, during this period, have no expectation of continued employment. 
Probationary period. A period of time provided to allow the department head an opportunity to evaluate an employee's performance and ability, and to decide whether or not the employee is to be retained. 
Promotion. Assignment of an employee from one class to another, which has a higher maximum rate of pay. 
Random drug test. An event used to test for drugs and or alcohol under the policies and procedures set for in the Clay County Substance Abuse Policy. 
Regular employee. A covered employee who has successfully completed the new hire probationary period. 
Reinstatement. The rehiring, with benefits, of a former employee who has resigned in good standing. 
Removal/dismissal. Separation of an employee on probation or for failure to meet the requirements of employment. 
Seasonal employee. An employee serving in a reoccurring position with a specified function which is funded for part of the fiscal year; eligible for holiday pay but ineligible for all other benefits. 
Serious health condition. An illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition which involves: 
a.	Inpatient care in a hospital, hospice or residential health care facility;
b.	Continuing treatment by a health care provider;
c.	A period of incapacity requiring absence from work of more than three consecutive calendar days and subsequent treatment including either two visits to a health care provider or one visit followed by continuing treatment under the health care provider's supervision; 
d.	A period of incapacity due to pregnancy or prenatal care;
e.	Periodic treatment for chronic serious health conditions; or
f.	Episodic periods of incapacity of less than three consecutive days resulting from chronic health conditions, which may not require treatment by a health care provider. 
Shall. The term "shall" shall be interpreted as mandatory. 
Shift. A daily work period interval for county employees. 
Standards. The term used to mean the minimum performance requirements needed to perform day-to-day duties of a job as defined in the Clay County Personnel Policy and/or specific job descriptions. 
Suspension/administrative leave. An enforced leave of absence for disciplinary purposes or, because of a pending investigation of charges made against an employee. 
Temporary. A position with a limited job function, ineligible for benefits, and for a period not to exceed 90 days within the fiscal year authorized for nonreoccurring functions. 
Transfer. Assignment of an employee form one position to another within the same pay grade. 
Unethical. Behavior not conforming to accepted standards of conduct. 
Written caution. A written reprimand that specifies the unsatisfactory element of job performance and is corrective or cautionary in nature. A written reprimand must define the area or areas of needed improvement by the employee, set up goals for achievement of the improvement, and inform the employee that failure to improve the area(s) of deficiency may result in a more serious adverse action. A written reprimand shall be issued by the employee's immediate supervisor. 
Note: As used herein, the terms Personnel Management System, Personnel Management Plan, Plan, and kindred terms, shall mean this article specifically and all amendments hereto. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT 

Sec. 32.3.1 - Policy of the county. 
The Clay County Commission advocates the acceptance of the concept that the quality of public service can attain maximum efficiency and effectiveness through a personnel management system based on merit principles. Further, the county recognizes that a dual responsibility exists (to both the public and the employees) and is necessary in order that these goals are achieved. 
The attitude and deportment of all county employees shall at all times be such as to promote the good will and favorable attitude of the public toward the County Commission and its programs and policies. All employees are required to maintain their personal appearance in a manner, which will reflect a proper image to the public; they are encouraged to develop skills and seek formal training that will enhance their personal development and the overall expertise of the organization. 
It is the policy of the county to expect from its employees' compliance with all rules and regulations of the county, state statutes, and federal regulations in the performance of their duties, as well as compliance with all safety rules and standards. Any employee who violates any of these rules and regulations shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to, but not necessarily including termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.2 - Code of ethics—Conflict of interest. 
To assist the understanding of potential conflicts of interest, which could arise, the following policies shall be adhered to by all employees of the county, including elected and appointed officials: 
A.	No employees shall use or attempt to use their position to secure special privileges or exemptions for themselves or for others, except as may be provided by policy or law. 
B.	An employee shall not accept gifts, kickbacks, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom he has official relationships on business of the County Government. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important the inspectors, contracting officers, and enforcement officers guard against relationships, which might be considered as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action. Items in the category of advertising novelties (i.e., matches, pencils, calendars) having wide distribution may be retained by the employee. 
C.	No employees shall accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity, which they might reasonably expect, would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired because of their position with the county. 
D.	No employees shall disclose confidential information they have gained due to their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefits. 
E.	If any employee of the county is an officer, director, agent, or member of, or owns controlling interest in any corporation, firm, partnership, or other business entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has substantial business commitments with the county or other political subdivision of the state, he/she shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the Clay County Clerk of Superior Court. 
F.	No employees shall transact any business in their official county capacity with any business of which they are an officer, director, agent, or member, or in which they own a controlling interest. 
G.	When employees have any questions or concerns as to the applicability of this policy, they should discuss these questions or concerns with their respective department heads or the County Administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.3 - Departmental policies. 
Policies established by the heads of the respective departments shall remain valid and in force unless they conflict with the Personnel Policy Plan. In such instances, the Personnel Policy Plan shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.4 - Nepotism. 
No member of the immediate family of an employee who has supervisory authority will be hired by the county within the same department except as may be determined to be in the best interest of the county by the County Commission. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.5 - Political activity. 
Any person holding a position in the county shall have the same privilege to exercise his/her right of franchise as any other citizen; however, no county employee shall take an active part in any political campaign, including the active solicitation of votes and the distribution of political material, during normal hours of work. Additionally, no county employee shall be a paid director of any political party or political caucus while in the employ of the county. 
Any employee, as defined in the above paragraph, who runs for any elected Clay County Office, must, upon qualifying, take a leave of absence from the county until no longer qualified, or elected. If elected, the employee must resign the county position and shall be disqualified from county employment until one year after leaving elected office. 
No elected or appointed official, department head, or other employee of the county shall directly or indirectly coerce any other employee to neither contribute or otherwise support any person, party, committee, or agency for political purposes, nor threaten to discharge or otherwise coerce any employee for voting or not voting in any election, or to influence the vote of any employee. 
No employee or elected official of the county may use any county property, real or personal to promote or aid, either their own or another candidate's political campaign. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.6 - Outside employment. 
Departmental policy notwithstanding, employees are not restricted in other employment during their off-duty hours; however, county employment shall be considered the primary employment, and no employees may engage in outside employment, which would interfere with their county duties. 
All full-time employees shall give notice of outside employment to the department head for concurrence of the County Administrator. If the County Administrator determines that a conflict of employment exists, such will be cause to require the termination of either of the two jobs, at the employee's option. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.7 - Release of information. 
No employee entrusted with, or having knowledge of, information of a confidential nature concerning either another employee or the county, shall release such information without the specific approval of the County Administrator. Violation of this rule shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to, but not necessarily including termination of employment. 
Employees shall at all times be courteous, friendly and helpful to those members of the public who seek information and access to county records. In accordance with the above paragraph, no employee shall divulge information or permit access to records, which are confidential, and not a public record. Unless release of information is a normal part of an employee's duties, that employee shall decline courteously to reveal information and shall direct inquiry to the department head, the County Clerk, or the County Administrator. 
Except for law enforcement personnel acting in their official capacity, should employees receive a subpoena to make a statement regarding county business, they shall first discuss the content of the subpoena with the County Administrator and the County Attorney. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.8 - Solicitations. 
Employee contributions to recognized charitable organizations are purely voluntary; no coercion of an employee to make contributions shall be permitted. County employees are prohibited from soliciting any other employee of the county on behalf of any organization during their working hours or the working hours of the employee sought to be solicited. Employees are prohibited from distributing any literature, which tends to promote any organization during working hours in any area where county work is performed. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.9 - Employee debts. 
The county will not act as a collection agency for an employee or for collection agencies against employees unless so ordered by the court (see Garnishments). However, should complaints concerning employees' failure to meet financial obligations interfere with their job performance, they shall be so informed. Should the condition continue, such employees may be subject to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.10 - Use of county property. 
County property is to be used for county business only; no county property shall be used by employees, Commissioners, or Constitutional Officers for their personal use. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.11 - Purchase of county property. 
No elected official, officer, employee of the county, or their delegated representative may purchase county property. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.3.12 - General prohibitions. 
A.	No employee shall make any false statement, certification, mark, rating or report with regard to any test certification, or appointment made under these rules, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of these rules. 
B.	No employee shall directly or indirectly give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept any money, service, or any other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or any advantage in a position in the county service. 
C.	No employee shall deceive or obstruct any persons in their right to application, certification, eligibility, or appointment under these rules; or to furnish to any person any special or confidential information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the county service. 
D.	No employee or official whose duties involve the use of a badge, card, or clothing insignia as evidence of authority or for identification purposes shall permit such badge, card, or insignia to be used or worn by any person who is not authorized to use or wear same, nor permit same to be out of their possession without good cause, or approval of the department head or authorized superior. Such badge, card or insignia shall be used only in the performance of the official duties of the position to which they relate. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 4. - PERSONNEL RECORDS 

Sec. 32.4.1 - Administration. 
All employee records shall be kept in the custody of the County Administrators Office. The County Clerk shall have both possession of and control over all employee financial records; the County Administrator shall have control over all personnel records and approval of employee payroll, notwithstanding that such records may be in the possession of the County Clerk. The County Clerk shall perform all duties connected with the upkeep of the financial records, insuring the approval of employee payroll by the County Administrator and the County Administrator or his/her designee, shall perform all duties connected with the upkeep of the personnel records. See also, Section XIII, § 13.6 Payroll Records Retention and Disposition, [as found in the Clay County Financial Policy]. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.4.2 - Records kept in the personnel folder. 
It will be the responsibility of each department head to initiate and provide written information on each employee for inclusion in that employee's permanent personnel records folder. This information shall become a part of the employee's personnel record. Information kept as permanent records in each employee's personnel records folder may include the following: 
A.	Resume and/or application form;
B.	Safety indoctrination, when applicable;
C.	Letters of commendation;
D.	Letters of recommendation;
E.	Performance evaluations;
F.	Letters of awards;
G.	School records, diplomas, etc.;
H.	Written cautions;
I.	Written reprimands;
J.	Notices of promotion, demotion, etc.;
K.	Notice of termination of employment;
L.	Federal withholding forms;
M.	State withholding forms;
N.	Acceptance of personnel policy form;
O.	Requests for paid vacation forms;
P.	Requests for leave;
Q.	Others as required.
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.4.3 - Keeping records current. 
Employees should be aware of the importance of keeping their personnel records current. Employees are responsible for immediately notifying their department head of any changes, such as changes in dependents, address (even if temporary), educational status, etc. It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that such information is current. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.4.4 - Records inspection. 
Employees shall have the right to inspect their own employment records by scheduling an appointment and at the convenience of the County Administrator. Department heads may inspect records of personnel in their department at the convenience of the County Administrator. The convenience of the County Administrator will not exceed three business days from the day of the request by either party. All records inspections shall be conducted in accordance with relevant state and federal laws pertaining to confidentiality. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.4.5 - Records retention and disposition. 
The County Administrator, on the advice of the County Clerk, shall determine the time limit that any personnel records shall be kept on file, and the final disposition of such records, in accordance with applicable laws, except when disposal of personnel records would be in conflict with § 13.6 Payroll Records Retention and Disposition [as found in the Clay County Financial Policy]. In these instances § 13.6 shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 5. - HIRING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 32.5.1 - Vacancies. 
When a vacancy occurs in any department, the department head shall so inform the County Administrator, who will then begin the hiring procedure. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.2 - Notice to employees. 
In accordance with Section 32.6.3 of this chapter, a notice of vacancy shall be circulated for five working days among county employees; any employee may apply for the vacant position. If an employee meets the position requirements, he/she may request a promotion, a transfer, or a voluntary demolition from the County Administrator to fill the vacancy. Vacancies occurring due to in-house placement shall be filled in like manner, if possible. See Section 32.5.4, Exemptions. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.3 - Notice to public. 
If a position is not filled internally, the County Administrator shall place an advertisement on the county bulletin board and in a local newspaper announcing the opening. In addition, a newspaper advertisement shall run for a minimum of two separate publications in the legal organ, spanning not less than ten days. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.4 - Exemptions. 
The position of the County Administrator and County Clerk are exempted from in-house preference. This restriction does not, however, preclude county employees from applying for this position in competition with other applicants. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.5 - Applications. 
All applicants for employment with the county shall complete an application form. Application information shall also include any other documentation requested by the county. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.6 - Eligibility. 
Applicants shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as necessary to ensure obtaining well-qualified candidates for the vacant position. In cases where county residents and nonresidents are equally qualified, county residents shall receive first consideration in filling the vacancy. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.7 - Interviews. 
After the deadline for reception of applications, the department head shall rank the applications and schedule interviews. In instances where there are more than three applicants for a position, only the top three qualified applicants need be interviewed. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.8 - Basis for employment. 
Employment with the county shall be based solely on merit, ability and fitness as evidenced by: 
A.	Training and experience.
B.	Examination score, if applicable.
C.	Pre-employment drug screening
D.	Outcome of the applicant interview.
E.	Evaluation of Motor Vehicle Records (see Attachment I for details).
F.	A pre-employment physical examination which may be required; for all law enforcement, fire, and public work applicants, such an examination shall be required. 
G.	High school diploma, GED or certificate of completion from an accredited technical institution is desired. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.9 - Employment of department heads. 
Department heads shall be both hired and terminated by the County Administrator with the concurrence of the County Commission. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.10 - Employment of the physically challenged. 
Physically challenged applicants will be considered for any position, insofar as their physical constraint(s) does not, following a reasonable accommodation by the county, impair that applicant's ability to perform the duties of the position being applied for. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.5.11 - Personnel orientation checklist. 
Upon hiring of new employee, the department manager will offer a "personnel orientation checklist" (Attachment F) to the employee. The employee will check each item discussed and sign the form. This form will become a part of the employees personnel file. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 6. - APPOINTMENTS, PROBATION, PROMOTION, DEMOTION, REINSTATEMENT 

Sec. 32.6.1 - Types of appointments. 
A.	Full-time appointments are those which normally constitute eight working hours each day, or 40 working hours each week. 
B.	Part-time appointments are those for which working hours are normally less than 35 hours per week. 
C.	Permanent appointments are those appointments which are reasonably expected to be of more than a temporary nature. 
D.	Temporary appointments are those which, due to the nature of the job, are to last for only a specific period of time, usually no longer than one calendar year. 
E.	Appointments may be permanent full-time, permanent part-time, temporary full-time or temporary part-time. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.2 - Probation. 
The probationary or "employee work-performance evaluation" period is an integral part of the county's hiring procedure. It is utilized to closely observe the employee's work, to secure the most effective adjustment of a new employee to a position, and to reject any employee who does not meet required standards. The probationary period shall be six months for all employees. 
When employees successfully complete their probationary period, they may be placed on permanent employment status. To be so placed, probationary employees must have an overall satisfactory report on their final probationary performance evaluation, with no section less than satisfactory. 
Probationary employees who are unable or unwilling to perform their duties as prescribed in the job description or to the satisfaction of the department head shall be released from county employment at the discretion of the department head, with the approval of the County Administrator. Employees who attain an overall satisfactory on their probationary performance evaluation, but have one or more "needs improvement" sections, may, at the discretion of the department head and with the approval of the County Administrator, be placed on an extension of probation, not to exceed six months; if performance is still not satisfactory, the employee shall be released from county employment. 
Released probationary employees shall have no right to appeal the removal. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.3 - Promotions. 
It shall be the policy of the county that as far as is practical and feasible, all vacancies in the county service shall be filled by the promotion of persons already employed by the county. 
Promotion qualification shall be evaluated from the following: 
A.	Prior performance evaluations. To be considered for promotion, an employee should have overall performance evaluations higher than "satisfactory." 
B.	A promotional interview with the department head. To be considered for promotion, the employee should have his/her department head's recommendation for the position. 
C.	Job-related experience, aptitude, education and communication skills.
D.	Fitness test may be required of job description requires (law enforcement, EMS, etc.)
All promoted employees shall serve six-month probation in the higher position. No employee who is in a probationary status in one county position shall be allowed to apply for promotion to another position for the duration of the probationary period. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.4 - Demotion—Voluntary. 
Employees may be demoted at their own request to positions to a lower job classification, subject to the approval of the County Administrator. Employees voluntarily demoted shall receive the same or closest rate of pay in the new position as they received in the previous position; notwithstanding, however, that if the employee's pay rate in the previous position was higher than the highest pay rate in the new position, then the employee shall be paid at the highest rate in the new position. 
The decision to be voluntarily demoted is at the discretion of the employee, with the concurrence of the County Administrator; reasons for such a request may include a personally perceived temporary or permanent inability to perform satisfactorily at the higher position, or any other such personal reason. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.5 - Demotion—Involuntary. 
Except for voluntary demotions, no employee shall be permanently demoted to a lower job classification; however, the County Administrator may authorize a decrease in an employee's rate of pay in lieu of a suspension as outlined in Section 32.8.6. The County Administrator shall set the time limit of the demotion and the amount of the decrease provided that the limits shall be a maximum of 30 working days and five percent in pay, respectively. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.6 - Rehire. 
An employee who has left the county service in good standing may be rehired within one year without having to serve a probationary period. A former employee who is appointed to a position not in the same general job classification shall have to undergo a probationary period and attain a satisfactory evaluation. Furthermore, there is no assurance that rehired employees will be placed in the same position held previously, or in the same general job classification. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.6.7 - Reinstatement. 
An employee, who has worked for the county for five or more consecutive years and has terminated in good standing, may be reinstated within one year from termination date. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 7. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 32.7.1 - Nondisciplinary separations. 
A.	Retirement. All employees shall be governed by retirement age regulations as put forth by the United States Social Security Laws and Regulations, unless an extension is approved by the County Administrator. 
B.	Disability. If an employee becomes unable to perform the duties required by the job description, reasonable accommodation shall be made to place that employee in another position which he/she can perform satisfactorily (see Section 32.6.4), provided that such a move will not cause a financial burden on the department. If placement into another position cannot be accomplished successfully, the County Administrator shall take steps to separate the employee either through retirement or disability pension. No guarantees will be made to alternative placement. 
C.	Resignation. To resign in good standing, an employee shall give two-weeks notice and shall work for at least ten working days prior to termination. Failure to comply with this rule will be entered on the employee's service record, and may be cause for denying the employee future employment with the county. The County Administrator may exempt notice if exceptional circumstances warrant such exemption. Exceptional circumstance may be military activation in times of national security or disaster, death of a family member requiring relocation, relocation of spouse due to the above, others as may be determined by the County Administrator. 
D.	Reduction in force (lay-off). The County Administrator, with the concurrence of the County Commission, may lay off one or more employees when it is deemed necessary by reason of a shortage of funds or work, the abolition of the position, or other material changes in duties or in the organization. No permanent employee will be laid off while another person on a temporary or part-time basis is employed in the same job classification unless the permanent employee has unsatisfactory employee evaluations. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.7.2 - Grounds for dismissal. 
Aside from those instances generally alluded to in the policy wherein an employee may be dismissed; dismissal may also include, but shall not be limited to: 
A.	Failure to meet prescribed standards of work; unacceptable morality or ethics to an extent that makes an employee unsuitable for the kind of employment in county service in which he/she was working at the time of the offense; or disgraceful personal conduct. 
B.	Violation of Georgia law prohibiting public employees from participating in a strike against a public employer. 
C.	Malicious destruction of county property.
D.	Conviction of a criminal offense.
E.	Being under the influence of intoxicating beverages or illegal drugs while on duty. Employees using drugs prescribed by their medical professional that affect their work performance will not be allowed to work their shift and will be sent home on sick leave and required to remain on sick leave until they are able to return to work without the influence. 
F.	Unauthorized absences or abuse of leave privileges.
G.	Acceptance of any valuable consideration, which was given, with the expectation of influencing the employee in the performance of official duties. 
H.	Falsification of records or use of official position for personal advantage, to include applications, time sheets, purchase orders, etc. 
I.	Willful negligence of duties.
J.	Fighting, inciting a fight or attempting to injure others.
K.	Stealing or attempting to steal from the County Government, private citizens or an employee. 
L.	Behavior the County Administration or County Commissioners believes to be immoral or indecent. 
M.	Unauthorized possession of weapons, firearms, or explosives on the job.
N.	Sleeping while on the job.
O.	Falsification of personnel or other records.
P.	Misuse or removal of employee lists, county records, or confidential information of any nature from the premises without proper authorization. 
Q.	Dishonesty.
R.	Advocating, being or has been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of our government. 
S.	Sabotage, espionage, or an attempt of same.
T.	Threatening, cursing, slandering or otherwise showing disrespect toward supervision, government or company representative. 
U.	Violating security measures for financial records, administrative records and information technology. 
V.	Further grounds for disciplinary actions are found in Section 32.7.3, Employee conduct policy. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.7.3 - Employee conduct policy. 
Rules and regulations are essential to the efficient and successful operation of any organization. The rules listed herein have been established to provide common guidance in the day-to-day operation of Clay County. Clay County assures that all administration concerning discipline to employees will be done in a fair and consistent manner. 
The following rules are not intended to be inclusive of all the standards for job performance and personal conduct. These rules apply to all employees. The following is a list of some of the types of misconduct that may result in disciplinary action: 
1.	Obscene or abusive language.
2.	Leaving work without permission.
3.	Poor housekeeping.
4.	Reading newspapers, periodicals or loafing on the job.
5.	Distribution of literature, circulars, pamphlets, or any other printed material while at work. 
6.	Smoking in "No Smoking" areas.
7.	Threatening, intimidating, coercing or interfering with other employees at any time while on the job. 
8.	Making false, vicious or malicious statements concerning any employee or elected official of the county. 
9.	Selling, soliciting or collecting contributions for any purpose while on the job.
10.	Violation of safety or fire regulations or common safety practices, which includes moving traffic violations or accidents. 
11.	Habitually reporting late for work (three times or more in a 30-day period).
12.	Habitual unauthorized absences (two or more times in any two-week period).
13.	Unsatisfactory quality and/or quantity of work.
14.	Posting unauthorized notices on bulletin boards or removing or altering notices on company bulletin boards. 
15.	Creating unsanitary conditions.
16.	Disposing refuse in places other than containers provided for that purpose.
17.	Operation of machines, tools or equipment to which an employee has not been specifically assigned by a supervisor. 
18.	Preparing to quit work for the day prior to the specified time.
19.	Failure to work scheduled overtime unless excused therefrom.
20.	Willful abuse or destruction of owner's property, company property or government property.
21.	Gambling, lottery or involvement in any other game of chance during work hours.
22.	Horseplay, scuffling or throwing objects.
23.	Performing outside work that interferes with employee's specified duties for which he or she is employed. 
24.	Conviction of criminal offense other than minor traffic violations and misdemeanors.
25.	Performing work on personal property during working hours or with county tools or equipment. 
26.	Using county telephones without authorization.
27.	Failure to use personal protective equipment (PPE).
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.7.4 - Return of county property. 
All county property is, and shall remain, the property of the county, and shall be returned in good condition to the county at time of separation from county employment. Employees in violation of this rule are to be considered terminated not in good standing and such will be placed in the employee's personnel folder. This section does not abrogate the county's right to take any legal action to ensure return of its property. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.7.5 - Exit interview. 
Upon separation with the county service, each employee is encouraged to undergo an exit interview with the County Administrator or his/her designee. The intent and purpose of this interview is to provide county management with information as to why and in what areas employees may be dissatisfied with their jobs, suggestions which may enhance county operations, and other information pertinent to good personnel relations and heightened county efficiency and effectiveness. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.7.6 - Reimbursement of expenses. 
Any employee who leaves the employment of the county within one year of having taken a physical or mental examination paid for by the county (including a pre-employment drug screening), shall have the cost of such examination(s) deducted from his/her final paycheck. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 8. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

Sec. 32.8.1 - Purpose. 
In certain instances, a disciplinary measure against an employee does not warrant dismissal; in these cases, disciplinary measures of less severity may be considered. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.2 - Notice of disciplinary action. 
Notice to employees of any disciplinary action to be taken against them is mandatory; the supervisor or department head initiating the action shall so inform the employee immediately at the first on-the-job opportunity. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.3 - Warning. 
This is the lowest level of disciplinary action; it is, in effect, an oral reprimand to the employee. A notice of oral reprimand shall be prepared by the supervisor and placed in the employee's personnel folder. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.4 - Written caution. 
The written caution shall be issued for offenses, which require more than an oral reprimand, or for the continuation of an offense on which an oral reprimand has been given. A copy of the written caution shall be placed in the employee's personnel folder. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.5 - Written reprimand. 
A written reprimand shall be issued for offenses, which require a more severe action than the written caution, for the continuing occurrence of an offense on which a written caution has been issued, or on the third occurrence of an offense on which an oral reprimand has been issued. A copy of the written reprimand shall be placed in the employee's personnel folder. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.6 - Suspension. 
An employee may be suspended without pay for the following reasons: 
A.	For an offense warranting more than a written reprimand but not necessarily warranting dismissal. 
B.	In lieu of a third written reprimand for the same offense.
C.	For offenses as stipulated in Section 32.7.3. 
A copy of the notice of suspension shall be placed in the employee's personnel folder. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.8.7 - Right to appeal. 
The right to appeal any disciplinary action except an oral reprimand shall not be abridged. Appeal of disciplinary action taken by the department head may be made to the County Administrator. Appeal of disciplinary action taken by the County Administrator on department heads may be made to the County Commission. The grievance procedure as outlined in Division 11 shall be followed. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 9. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 32.9.1 - Hours of work. 
The normal hours of work for full-time employees are as follows: 
A.	County Administration: 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday—Friday. 
B.	Public Works: 
a.	Roads: Monday—Thursday 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
b.	Solid Waste: Monday—Thursday 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
c.	Water: To be determined.
Note: Hours are subject to change by management. 
C.	Department heads shall work a normal 40-hour week unless otherwise enumerated herein.
D.	Time cards: All hourly paid employees must maintain their time on time cards, either in writing or, if available, with an electronic time clock. All employees' time must be submitted to the County Clerk no later than 10:00 a.m. on Monday of payroll week. Time cards will be turned in weekly before payroll checks will be distributed. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.2 - Overtime. 
Overtime work is not encouraged by the county; however, needs of the county may require overtime by the employee. In these instances, the pay policies as established shall govern the rates of pay to be given. No county employee may take compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay. Only authorized overtime shall be compensated. Overtime authorization for employees other than the County Administrator shall come from the employee's department head. The authorization for the County Administrator shall come from the Commission. The County Administrator shall authorize department head overtime. 
A.	As a general rule, the requirement for frequent and considerable overtime in a department shall be considered evidence of under staffing or improper organization and shall be subject to review by the County Administrator. Department heads are responsible for recommending to the County Administrator for approval any change of hours, shifts, to include split shifts, or other measures, which will reduce or eliminate overtime for groups or individuals. 
B.	Overtime work shall include only that work performed by employees at the direction of a department head or his authorized representative that is approved by the County Administrator and which exceeds the number of hours constituting both the established workweek and period of the shifts involved. 
C.	All overtime shall be computed to the nearest one-quarter hour.
D.	Records of all overtime worked shall be kept by the department head as directed by the County Administrator. 
E.	Department heads are responsible for assuring that required overtime is distributed among their employees on as equitable basis as the skills of their employees and department needs and the welfare of the employees will allow. 
9.2.1 Employees to whom overtime is paid. 
A.	Nonexempt employees.
B.	Exempt employees, but only during a declared state of emergency or when approved by the board. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.3 - Holidays. 
The following shall constitute the official paid holidays for all full-time employees in the county service: 
New Year's Day; 
Martin Luther King's birthday; 
Presidents' Day; 
Good Friday; 
Memorial Day; 
Independence Day; 
Labor Day; 
Thanksgiving Day; 
Day after Thanksgiving; 
Christmas Eve; 
Christmas Day. 
9.3.1 Holiday guidelines. 
A holiday will normally be observed on the date designated by the Clay County Board of Commissioners provided: 
A.	Holiday pay will be a maximum of eight hours per designated holiday regardless of normal shift hours. 
B.	All full-time employees will receive eight hours of holiday pay for each designated holiday as listed in Section 32.9.3 at their regular listed rate of pay. 
C.	Holidays that fall on Saturday will be paid on the prior week and holidays that fall on Sunday will be paid in the next pay period. 
D.	Part time employees will be paid holiday pay on a prorated basis. For example, if they work 16 hours of a 40-hour week they would receive 3.2 hours of vacation pay. (Hours worked divided by 40 hours in week × eight holiday hours.) 
E.	An employee who is required to work on a day proclaimed as a holiday shall be compensated for the work. Hourly employees who work holiday time will be compensated at two hours for each hour worked. 
F.	In circumstances where the operations of the county are subject to seasonal fluctuations that impact the availability of work, a department head may elect, upon notification to employees by the adoption of a written policy, to grant equivalent time off at any time within the calendar year in which equivalent time off for a holiday is accrued. 
G.	The equivalent time off shall not exceed the time actually worked on the day proclaimed as a holiday or eight hours, whichever is less. 
9.3.2 Part-time employees. 
A part-time employee shall not receive additional compensation or time off for a holiday if they do not work any hours in the week the holiday falls on. 
9.3.3 Working on a holiday. 
Employees who work any schedule of eight-hour days in which the scheduled off days equal or exceed 116 days a year shall not be granted additional compensation or additional time off for holidays. Appropriate pro rata adjustment consistent with this provision shall be made for any employee whose regularly scheduled workday is other than eight hours. 
9.3.4 Advance holiday. 
An employee shall not be granted a holiday in advance of the declaration and observance of such holidays as provided in this rule. 
9.3.5 Holiday pay status. 
An employee shall be paid for a holiday or unanticipated nonworkday only if the employee is in pay status the full scheduled work shift the scheduled work day before and/or after the holiday. Provided, however, that: 
a.	Such payment shall not be made if the employee is separating from county service and the holiday is in a different calendar year. 
b.	An employee scheduled to work on a holiday who fails to report for any portion of the scheduled duty and whose absence is not authorized, shall not be granted additional compensation or time off for the holiday. 
9.3.6 Holiday and annual leave. 
Holidays that occur during annual leave shall not be charged against annual leave. An employee who is not on annual leave, and fails to report to work on the day before and/or the day after a holiday shall not be paid for that holiday. Permanent part-time employees shall be paid on a pro-rata share of their regular work hours versus 40 work hour week provided the employee works at least the previous business day prior to the holiday or the day after the holiday. (Example: If a permanent part-time employee worked 20 hours they would receive four hours holiday time. 20/40= .50 × 8 = 4 hrs.) 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.4 - Vacation. 
All full-time permanent employees shall be allowed vacation leave as follows: 

 
Vacation shall be earned after completion of one full year of employment and accumulated on each employee's anniversary date thereafter. 
Permanent part-time employees who work 20 hours or more per week shall earn vacation leave specified for full-time employees, however, such earnings and limitations shall be prorated by the percentage of time worked. The percentage of time worked shall be determined by dividing the employee's standard hours by 40. [Georgia Personnel Board of Rules, PAR 18.201.1 and PAR 18.201. 
Vacation leave may be earned to a total of 80 hours of unused vacation at the end of any one calendar year based on the employees hire date. All earned vacation in excess of 80 hours must be taken in the year earned. Excess hours must be used or may be bought back by the county at the discretion of the department head and with the County Administrator's approval. 
Vacation leave shall normally be granted in periods not less than one working day, nor more than ten working days in any one calendar year. However, vacation periods of less than one working day may be granted in unusual circumstances by the employee's department head, or in cases of personnel reporting to the County Administrator, by the County Administrator. 
An employee shall not be paid for earned vacation in lieu of taking such vacation without the written authorization of the County Administrator. (See Vacation request form—Attachment G.) 
Employees resigning in good standing with the county shall receive any vacation credit earned as of the date of resignation, not to exceed 80 hours, plus unused credited vacation in the current year. Employees removed for incompetence or inefficiency not involving misconduct shall also receive all earned vacation. Payment for earned vacation does not apply to employees having less than 12 months of service with the county. All payments for vacation shall be at the employee's current rate of pay. 
Employees who have submitted their two-week notice of termination shall not take vacation leave during this period without direct approval of the County Administrator; otherwise, such absence shall be considered absence without leave, will be so entered on the employee's permanent record, and shall be grounds for termination not in good standing. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.5 - Medical (sick) leave. 
All permanent employees shall be eligible to receive sick leave. Full-time employees shall earn sick leave at the rate of four hours per month, or six days per year. Permanent part-time employees shall earn sick leave at the rate of two hours per month, or three days a year. 
Sick Leave may be granted for the following reasons: 
A.	Absence due to personal injury, pregnancy or illness;
B.	Absence due to and result of medical surgery;
C.	Absence due to exposure to contagious diseases while not on the job, which may endanger others; 
D.	Absence due to an illness of a member of an employee's immediate family, which would require the personal care, and attention of the employee. No more than five working days may be taken for this purpose without the written approval of the County Administrator. The County Administrator shall provide the employee with a copy of the approval and place a copy in the employee's personnel file; 
E.	For other medical (physical or mental) purposes if approved by the County Administrator.
Necessary or required appointments with physicians, dentists or other medical practitioners shall be considered "personal" time. Employees shall make every effort to schedule such appointments outside working hours, if possible. Excessive personal time for these purposes may result in a written caution. Management will review with the employee if a "pattern" is evident and advise the employee of this possibility. The review and discussion with the employee will be documented by management and placed in the employee's personnel file. 
"Personal" time shall be "unpaid time away from the job". 
9.5.1 Rate of accrual and accumulation of sick leave. 
A.	Employees are not eligible to take sick leave during the first six months of their probationary period. Employees on probation will be allowed to use their accrued sick leave after the first six months have expired. 
B.	Sick leave may be accumulated from month-to-month and year-to-year with no limit to the amount that can be accumulated. 
9.5.2 Use of accrued sick leave. 
An employee may use accrued sick leave for personal illness or disability, or for medical, dental, or eye examinations for which arrangements cannot be made outside of working hours. Medical appointments pursuant to Family and Medical Leave (FMLA Leave) may be made during working hours. Accrued sick leave may also be used to care for immediate family members when the leave does not otherwise qualify as FMLA leave. 
Excessive or abusive use of sick leave shall be defined as a pattern of intermittent, short term, or a repetitive "pattern" of sick leave usage. Establishment of this pattern shall include, but not be limited to, the following indicators: 
A.	Frequent use of sick leave in conjunction with holidays, scheduled off days or distribution of pay checks; 
B.	Frequent use of sick leave when scheduled for undesirable temporary shifts or assignments or during periods of peak work load; 
C.	Requesting sick leave for an absence for which annual leave has previously been denied;
D.	Frequent occurrences of illness during the work day;
E.	Peculiar and increasingly improbable excuses;
F.	Repetitive use of less than 16 hours of sick leave in 40-day periods;
G.	Prior written notification of failure to adhere to procedures for approval of leave, inappropriate attendance or inappropriate use of leave. 
9.5.3 Notice requirements. 
A.	Regular absence: The employee shall report the illness prior to scheduled work time, if possible. If not, the absence is to be reported within 30 minutes after the time work is scheduled to begin. Department heads may require employees to report illness two hours prior to beginning a shift as department policy. 
B.	FMLA absence: Employees using sick leave during any foreseeable family and medical leave period must give 30 days' notice in advance of taking the leave; or if family and medical leave is to begin within 30 days or the leave is not foreseeable, then notice shall be given as soon as practicable. 
9.5.4 Medical certification. 
Certification by physician for regular absence: A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by the department head, Personnel Director, County Administrator, or appointing authority to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
A.	Any period of absence consisting of three or more consecutive working days for regular employees or two shifts for 24-hour personnel. 
B.	Leave of any duration if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate will be required. 
Certification by a health care provider for FMLA absence: A medical certificate signed by a health care provider shall be required to substantiate a request for sick leave, as follows: 
A.	Leave due to the serious health condition of the employee or the employee's immediate family provided the employee has received written notification that certification will be required. Second and third opinions also may be required. 
B.	Recertification of a serious health condition may be required on a reasonable basis, but no more often than one time in any 30-day period during an employee's absence due to pregnancy, chronic, or permanent and long-term conditions under continuing supervision of a health care provider. No second or third opinion on recertification may be required. 
9.5.5 Failure to provide proper certification. 
A.	An employee's use of sick leave may be delayed or denied until proper certification is provided; or 
B.	If the employee never produces the requested certification, then the leave will not be counted as FMLA leave, and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
9.5.6 Exhausted sick leave—Short-term. 
No sick leave in excess of that accumulated may be granted. Employee may request unpaid leave to be approved on a case-by-case basis by the County Administrator for extreme situations of extended illness, injury, etc. 
9.5.7 Termination of employment. 
An employee, upon separation from the county, shall forfeit accrued sick leave and shall not receive payment for accumulated sick leave. 
The use of sick leave for any purpose other than those listed in Section 32.9.5 is prohibited. 
It is the employee's responsibility to keep personal time to a minimum and not assume it is a "right" of employment. Employees will be expected to return to work after appointments. 
9.5.8 Granting of sick leave or vacation in the event of catastrophic illness or injury. 
The County Commission understands that occasions of catastrophic illness or injury (major accidents, long term illness such as cancer or cancer treatments, major surgery, etc.) may cause for individual employees to exhaust their earned vacation or sick time. In such incidents, county employees who have surplus earned vacation and or sick time, may transfer (grant) their time to individual employees who are affected by catastrophic events. 
County employees who desire to grant this surplus time to others, may complete a form provided by the County Clerk and approved by the County Administrator. A manual adjustment will be made to decrease the granting employee and increase the employee in need of additional vacation or sick time. 
All such actions are voluntary and are made without any coercion or intimidation by administration or other county employees or officials. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.6 - Other leaves of absence. 
Administrative leave. Each employee shall be allowed a leave of absence if determined by the Board of Commissioners the employee is unable to perform his/her employment responsibilities due to investigations by federal, state or local judicial agencies that may be compromised or influenced by the employee reporting to work. Full-time employees will receive full pay for each pay period during the course of any investigation until that investigation is concluded and results are returned to the Board of Commissioners. Part-time employees will receive the same compensation based on their standard hours of employment. 
Sick time and vacation time will not be accrued during an employee's administrative leave. 
Upon re-instatement of an employee on administrative leave, sick time and vacation time shall be restored to the employee as determined by the Board of Commissioners. 
Conference leave. The County Administrator may grant conference leave with pay, together with the necessary travel expenses, in order that employees may attend conferences, schools and similar events designed to improve their efficiency and effectiveness, if considered to be in the best interest of the county. 
Bereavement leave. Paid leave, not to exceed three working days for each incident shall be granted to any full-time employee upon the death of a member of the employee's immediate family as defined in Division 2, Definitions. Bereavement leave requiring more than three working days shall require the written approval of the County Administrator. Extended bereavement pay will be unpaid leave. Employee may elect to use accrued vacation time for approved extended bereavement leave. The County Administrator shall give a copy of the approval to the employee. 
Employee's must submit documentation verifying the member of the family who is deceased; preferably before the leave is granted, but no later than one week after the employee returns to work. Failure to provide adequate documentation will potentially deny the employee's request for leave or require return of paid leave wages to the county. Documentation may include, but will not be limited to, an obituary, funeral program, copy of death certificate, others as approved by the County Administrator. 
Jury Duty. (As per the Rules of the State Personnel Board, Rule 478-1-18.600: Court Leave.): 
PAR. 18.601. Leave to Serve as a Juror or a Witness. 
An employee shall be entitled to [paid] leave of absence from duties, without loss of pay or time and without effect on any report of performance, on all days during which the employee shall be subpoenaed to serve as a juror or witness or for other proceedings for which an employee is subpoenaed or summoned to appear by any federal, state or local court. Employee must present a written statement provided by Clerk of Court attesting to attendance at court. 
PAR. 18.604. Penalties Prohibited. 
An employee shall not be discharged, disciplined or otherwise penalized because the employee is absent from employment for the purpose of attending a judicial proceeding in response to a subpoena, summons for jury duty, or other court order or process which requires the employee's attendance as at judicial proceeding. 
Employees are expected to return to work when released from jury duty if over one-half of the employee's workday is available. 
Military leaves. Permanent employees who resign their positions with the county to enter the armed forces during time of war or national emergency shall be placed on military leave without pay, and shall be restored to full employment as set out in State Statutes upon release from military duty. 
A permanent employee who leaves the service of the county to join the military forces not in the time of war or national emergency shall be granted military leave without pay in accordance with conditions as set forth in State Statutes. 
A permanent or probationary employee who is a member of the National Guard or an organized military reserve shall be allowed a maximum of 17 calendar days military leave with pay during any 12-month period when called to active duty or for training with the armed forces. In the event that the time of such training is optional, the time shall be designated by the County Administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.7 - Leave without pay. 
Leaves without pay, such as leaves of absence, sabbaticals, etc., may be granted for any legitimate purpose for a period of up to six months with the County Administrator's written approval. Prior to returning to work, the employee must give the County Administrator two weeks notice. Failure to give notice and/or failure to return to work at the end of the leave without adequate reason shall constitute a resignation of employment with the county. The County Administrator shall provide the employee with a copy of the approval and place a copy in the employees personnel file. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.8 - Safety policy. 
Clay County is extremely conscious of the safety of our employees and the citizens of our community. As an employer, we recognize our obligation to ensure the safest possible work place for our employees. As a governmental entity, we recognize our responsibility to provide a safe environment for the public we serve. 
It is our belief that most accidents are preventable. In accordance with this belief, we have allocated resources to administer an aggressive loss control program in Clay County. 
Each department head is responsible and will be held accountable for the loss control performance within his or her department. A Safety Coordinator (Risk Manager) has been appointed to coordinate our overall loss control program. The Safety Coordinator, however, is not responsible for the line functions, which are that of the department heads and supervisors. It is expected that department heads will complement the effort of the Safety Coordinator to reduce accidents and provide for the safety of the public. These loss control responsibilities are continuous and equal in importance with all other operational considerations. 
All employees are responsible for cooperating with and supporting our loss control program activities and objectives. All employees are expected to adopt the concept that the safe way to perform a task is the most efficient and only acceptable way to complete the task. 
Loss control is every employee's responsibility. Only with your help can we continue to maintain a safe environment for both our employees and the citizens we serve. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.9.9 - Return to work policy. 
It is the policy of Clay County to provide and establish a return to work policy and procedure for employees with work-related injuries and illnesses who are unable, temporarily and permanently, to return to their permanent job duties. 
Because Clay County recognizes their employees are valued and limited resources, this program is designed to: 
A.	Assist the medical recovery process by providing a focus and a goal for return of the injured employee. 
B.	Benefit employees by allowing them to return to full wages as soon as possible.
C.	Benefit employer by reducing worker's compensation costs.
Clay County will seek return to work opportunities through the use of transitional employment for all employees who are temporarily disabled due to an on-the-job injury as quickly as medically possible. Transitional employment opportunities will be considered in all departments, not just the department in which the injured employee was working before the injury or illness occurred. 
Transitional employment assignments are intended to assist workers who are transitioning back to work after a temporary disability that resulted from a work related injury. All transitional employment duties must be productive. Duties must never be demeaning or appear worthless in any way. 
Clay County, through their reasonable accommodation program, will make efforts to retain employees who are permanently disabled. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 10. - OTHER FRINGE BENEFITS 

Sec. 32.10.1 - Social Security. 
The county matches the Social Security contribution made by the employee. These combined funds are deposited with the Federal Government. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.2 - Worker's compensation. 
The county participates in worker's compensation. Employees injured while on the job may be compensated from this fund in conformance with O.C.G.A. 34-9-152. An injured employee must file the claim with the county within the work shift the injury occurred. Payments are made directly to the employee. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.3 - Unemployment compensation. 
The county is registered with the State of Georgia Department of Labor. Terminated employees who file a claim and are determined to be qualified may be eligible for benefits. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.4 - Life insurance. 
All permanent, full-time employees are insured under the County Group Term Life Insurance Program. Accidental Death and Dismemberment (AD&D) Insurance is also provided. This insurance is provided as part of the health benefits package from the county. Terms ands benefits may change from time to time. See the County Administrator or County Clerk for specific details. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.5 - Hospitalization. 
The county provides a major medical expense insurance program to all permanent full-time employees. This insurance is provided as part of the health benefits package from the county. Terms, benefits and co-pay participation may change from time to time. See the County Administrator or County Clerk for specific details. 
An employee who wishes to include his/her spouse and/or children in this program may do so by contributing the difference in premium payments. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.6 - Dental. 
Currently, the county's major medical expense insurance coverage does not include a dental benefit. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.7 - Training and education. 
The county encourages all employees to avail themselves of training and educational opportunities, insofar as it relates to their chosen career fields within budgetary constraints, the county will make funds available for use in employee schooling. All expenditures for training and education shall be approved by the County Administrator prior to the employees attending such training. 
In the case of employees attending out-of-hours college or relevant vocational education, expenses incurred shall be reimbursed, after approval by the County Administrator, to the employee after the successful completion of the college semester or vocational training certificate of completion. Employees will not receive hourly wages for education opportunities where the county pays the tuition fees. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.8 - Administration. 
The Office of the County Clerk shall be the administrator of these benefits. Detailed information on benefits is available to all employees by contacting the County Clerk's Office during normal working hours. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.9 - Changes in benefits. 
The employee benefits as herein described are subject to change as required by the provision of benefits provided by the county. All employees shall be informed as to the status of these benefits as they change. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.10.10 - Retirement benefit plan. 
All full-time employees are eligible to participate in the county-funded retirement benefit. The county shall inform and offer new employees at the time of hiring the option to enroll in this benefit plan. Employees are not required to enroll at the initiation of employment and may elect to enroll at a later date. Application forms are available in the county office. 
Under no circumstances will the county deny this opportunity to enroll to any employee. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 11. - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 32.11.1 - Purpose. 
This grievance procedure is established to provide employees full opportunity to bring to the attention of management, grievances that the employee feels need either adjustment or information. It is the intent and desire of the county to resolve grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be grievances, which will be resolved only after an appeal and review. The submission of a grievance shall in no way adversely affect the employee, nor his/her employment with the county. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.2 - Management. 
For the purpose of this grievance procedure, as well as generally, the following positions shall constitute management: 
County Administrator; 
County Clerk; 
EMS Director; 
Public Works Director. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.3 - Causes of grievances. 
Employees may file a grievance to register a complaint, to solve a problem, to redress an alleged wrong, and to modify or erase any disciplinary measures taken against them. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.4 - Unacceptable grievances. 
This grievance procedure is available to individual employees to resolve concerns as they pertain to the personnel policy rules and/or regulations of the county. Grievances are unacceptable if filed by one employee for another or for groups of employees. Members of management as defined in Section 32.11.2 shall not use this grievance procedure. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.5 - Grievance procedure. 
In order to assure all employees a method by which they can have their grievances considered rapidly, fairly, and without reprisal, the following steps are provided: 
A.	Employees shall, within three working days of the incident, discuss and explain the complaint orally with their immediate supervisor. The immediate supervisor will make a decision and notify the employee within two working days after the discussion with the employee. 
B.	If the employee feels that the matter has not been settled or adjusted to his/her satisfaction by the immediate supervisor, he/she may submit matter in writing to the County Administrator. The County Administrator will schedule a meeting within five working days after receipt of the written grievance, and shall give a written answer within three working days after the scheduled meeting. 
C.	If the grievance is still not resolved to the employee's satisfaction, he/she may appeal to the Board of County Commissioners. The Board shall schedule a meeting with the employee and others, at the Board's discretion, within ten working days and render a decision in writing within five working days thereafter. 
The decision of the County Commissioners on the employee's appeal shall be final and binding on the parties without right to further administrative appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.6 - General provisions of the grievance procedure. 
A.	This grievance procedure shall apply only to nonprobationary employees of the county.
B.	The time limits enumerated herein may be extended by no more than ten working days, and must be due to illness, vacation, business trips, or an emergency. If either the employee or management requires an extension of time, the other party to the grievance shall be so informed. 
C.	In some cases, steps in the grievance procedure may be waived to allow more severe matters to progress more rapidly; the waiver may be given only by the County Administrator, upon written application by the employee. 
D.	Under this grievance procedure, the employee and management both have the opportunity to call witnesses at the meeting called by the Commissioners (§ 32.11.5 C.) and thereafter in the procedure. 
E.	Employees shall have three working days to appeal the decision given in any of the aforementioned processes to the next higher step in the procedure. 
F.	Any grievance shall be considered settled at the completion of any step unless it is appealed within the time limits set forth herein. It is hoped that the great majority of grievances will be satisfactorily settled in the first or second step. 
G.	If management does not respond within the time limits established by this policy, the matter shall be deemed settled in favor of the employee. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.11.7 - Management grievances. 
Grievances by department heads shall be presented in writing to the County Administrator who shall schedule a meeting within three working days with the department head to discuss the grievance. If the grievance is not resolved at this time, the department head may petition for a hearing before the County Commission. 
The Commission shall hear the grievance within ten working days and render a decision in writing within five working days thereafter. Neither the department head, nor the County Administrator shall discuss the nature or content of the grievance with any party, including Commission Members, prior to Commission resolution of the grievance. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 12. - TRAVEL POLICY 

Sec. 32.12.1 - Travel. 
Clay County will adhere to the travel reimbursement as defined by the U.S. General Services Administration. The county will pay per diem rates as posted at the time of travel and found at: http://www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/contentView.do?contentld=17943&content Type=GSA_BASIC. Upon return from travel, employees should submit appropriate verification of attendance to the County Clerk for payment of per diem rates. This can include agenda, training materials, etc. Mileage should be documented as to where the travel terminated at (address of meeting place). The travel reimbursement request can be found in Attachment H. Should actual rates be over the per diem rates, the proper receipts may be submitted for payment. Upon approval by the County Administrator, actual receipts will be paid. This allowance will be applied in instances where a choice of hotel/motel is predetermined by the hosting sponsor of the function being attended. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 13. - COMPENSATION PLAN 

Sec. 32.13.1 - Purpose. 
The compensation plan is intended to provide equitable standards of pay for all classifications in the job classification plan. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.13.2 - Content of the compensation plan. 
The compensation plan contains the basic salary schedule as adopted by the County Commission, and subsequent amendments, and the schedule of salary ranges for all job classifications included in the job classification plan except those earning salaries established by a contract between the county and a recognized bargaining unit. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.13.3 - Use of the compensation plan. 
Salary ranges are used to develop incentive among employees to improve their performance and quality of work. The proper utilization of this plan provides the department head and the County Administrator with a means for reviewing performance, and affords the employee the opportunity to develop and achieve personal objectives. 
13.3.1 Responsibility for administration. 
A.	County Administrator and department heads. The primary responsibility for the administration of the pay plan rests with the County Administrator and department heads. These persons shall initiate requests for classification action on new positions and for reclassification action on existing positions. 
1.	Classification of new positions and reclassification of existing positions.
2.	Establishment of new grades for administrative and nonadministrative positions, the elimination of existing grades and the revision of specifications for positions. 
3.	Conducting periodic wage and salary studies to insure that the county's pay structure is competitive and uniform. 
13.3.2 Use of grades. 
A.	Minimum and maximum salary. The assignment of a position to a grade determines the minimum, midpoint and maximum salary for applicants filling the position. 
1.	A pay range is structured to provide a minimum, midpoint and a maximum salary.
2.	The progression of an employee within a pay range shall depend primarily on the work performance of the employee and the availability of funds. 
B.	Official job titles. Official job titles as listed in the pay plan shall be used on all personnel documents and payroll records and in the preparation of the operating budget. Working titles for internal department use should be used by departments only for purposes other than official personnel, payroll or budget documents. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.13.4 - Hiring rates. 
A.	New employees. A new employee usually shall be hired at the starting rate of pay for the classification to which the position has been allocated. 
B.	Exceptions. Exceptions may be made to allow an initial salary offer in excess of established salary rates as indicated below: 
1.	A salary offer may be made at a rate up to ten percent above the starting salary for the classification based on the employing department's evaluation of the applicant. Prior approval by the County Administrator is not required if funds are available in the budget for the position. 
2.	Based on an applicant's special qualifications or due to extenuating circumstances, the department head may recommend a higher rate of pay within an applicable pay range. If this is the case, complete justification should be submitted in writing to the County Administrator. In such cases, no commitment may be made to a prospective employee until written authorization is received from the County Administrator. 
3.	After a reasonable effort has failed to provide qualified applicants for vacant positions in a particular classification, the County Administrator may determine that a rate higher than 15 percent above the scheduled starting rate should be adopted to appoint a new employee. 
C.	Trainee. For certain grades of work in which the formalized training period is of unusual duration, and the needs of the county can best be met by placing an individual in a training capacity, and upon recommendation of the department head, the County Administrator may designate such position as a "trainee" position. Appointment to a "trainee" position shall be at a starting salary range below the minimum rate established for the classification. The specific salary range will be determined by the County Administrator in consultation with the appropriate department head. 
13.4.1 Pay increases. 
An employee may receive a pay increase by means of a salary increase or by a promotion. 
A.	Salary increase. A salary increase is advancement in salary within the same range. 
1.	Salary increases shall become effective at the next authorized adjustment date.
2.	Salary increases shall be initiated by the head of a department or budgetary department.
B.	Salary increase above pay range maximum. Annual merit increases for employees whose salaries exceed the pay range maximum are subject to the budget department's salary increase guidelines. 
C.	Promotions. 
1.	An employee shall be promoted when:
a)	The employee is transferred to a position in a classification with a higher pay range; or 
b)	The employee's position is reclassified to a classification having a higher pay range; or 
c)	The employee's position classification is assigned to a higher pay range.
2.	Promotions may occur within a department or between departments.
D.	Pay upon promotion. 
1.	When an employee is promoted to a classification with a higher pay range, a salary increase may be granted in an amount calculated in one of three ways: 
a)	Up to the minimum of the new classification; or
b)	Up to six percent above the employee's current salary; or
c)	Up to base plus ten percent of the pay range assigned to the position to which the employee was promoted. This option should be used only when the employing department determines that an applicant from outside the county with similar qualifications to the promoted employee would have been hired at a rate above the base for the classification. 
All promotions and related salary increases are contingent upon the availability of funds. If the amount budgeted in a position exceeds the highest amount as calculated in any of the three methods described, the excess amount may not be used in compensating the promoted employee. 
2.	When a promotion is effected through the reclassification of an employee's present position to a classification with a higher pay range, or when the classification is assigned to a higher pay range, that employee is eligible for a promotional salary increase (as calculated in subsection D.1.a), b), c), above) to begin on the effective date of the reclassification. The salary must be brought at least to the minimum rate for the new position at that time. The employee also remains eligible for an annual merit increase in addition to the promotional salary increase. 
3.	In either method of promotion, if the employee's current salary is equal to or greater than the base of the higher graded position, the employee is eligible for a promotional salary increase, calculated as described previously, but no increase is required. 
13.4.2 Pay upon demotion. 
A.	An employee shall be demoted when: 
1.	The employee is placed in a different classification having a lower pay range; or
2.	The employee's position is reclassified to a classification having a lower pay range; or 
3.	An employee moved to a lower grade for failure to perform job requirements or poor performance. 
B.	Pay policy. In case of a demotion of the type stated in subsection A.1., above, an employee's pay may remain unchanged or reduced at the discretion of the department head. In case of a demotion of the type stated in subsection A.2., an employee's salary should not be reduced. In case of a demotion of the type stated in subsection A.3., an employee's salary may be reduced upon review by the Administrator and department head. 
13.4.3 Lateral transfers. 
A.	An employee shall be laterally transferred when: 
1.	The employee is moved to a position in the same classification or to a position in another classification having the same pay range. 
2.	The employee's position is reclassified to a different classification having the same pay range. 
B.	Pay policy. An employee shall not be eligible for a salary increase at the time of a lateral transfer. 
13.4.4 Pay for part-time and temporary employment. 
Pay for part-time and temporary employment in a position shall be equivalent to the rate of pay for full-time employment in similar positions. Under extenuating circumstances, a part-time or temporary employee may be paid at a varying rate with written approval of the County Administrator. 
13.4.5 Budget Limitations. 
The implementation of policies and procedures pertaining to payment of salaries is contingent upon funds being available. Authorization may not be given to exceed the budgeted rate for any position regardless of the classification and/or pay range. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.13.5 - Payroll accounts. 
How payroll is computed. Currently, payroll consists of the following accounts and account codes: 
Regular time, account code 1: Hours worked by an employee up to 40 hours per week. 
Over time, account code 2: Hours worked by an employee after 40 hours of actual work. Employees will be compensated at one and one-half hours for each hour worked. 
Holiday time, account code 4: Hours compensated to employees for scheduled time off due to federal or local holidays (See holidays for a list of scheduled paid holidays.) Employees who work holiday time will be compensated at two hours for each hour worked. 
Sick time, account code 5: Hours compensated to employees for absence due to illness. (See sick time for an explanation of how sick time is accrued.) 
Vacation time, account code 7: Hours compensated to employees for absence due to vacation. (See vacation time for an explanation of how vacation time is accrued.) Currently, vacation time may be "bought back" by the county, if the business of the county needs warrant. 
Account code 8: Reserved. 
Account code 9: Reserved. 
Other time, account code 10: Hours compensated to exempt employees for absence not covered by other accounts, including administrative leave (paid/nonpaid) and jury duty. (See administrative leave and jury duty for an explanation of how they are handled.) 
Other time, account code 11: Currently reserved for the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
Other time, account code 12: Currently reserved for the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
13.5.1 How account hours are applied to employee payroll. 
Except for overtime and holiday time, all individual employee account hours must sum up to, not to exceed, 40 hours per pay period. Adjustments to sick time, personal time, vacation time (unless approved) and other time must be made by the employee/department manager to insure the 40-hour maximum is not exceeded. 
For example: 
Employee A has eight hours sick time, yet worked 33 hours regular time; for a total of 41 Hours. Sick time must be adjusted down to seven hours so the sum of both accounts equal 40 Hours. 
When more than two accounts are used in a pay period, the policy is the same; all account hours in a pay period must sum to 40 Hours. 
If an employee actually ("physically") works 40 regular hours, that employee may receive overtime compensation, if worked. 
Overtime will not be paid if the employee has not worked 40 Hours. Overtime hours can be applied to replace regular hours until the 40-hour minimum is reached. Any remaining hours will be considered overtime and compensated at one and one-half hours for each hour worked. 
Holiday time will be paid in accordance with Section 32.9.3 of this Clay County Personnel Policy. 
Therefore, if an employee does not work a holiday the remaining regular hours worked must equal 40 before an employee qualifies for overtime. 
Note: Payroll records retention policy may be found in the Clay County Financial Policy. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 14. - MERIT SYSTEM 

Sec. 32.14.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this merit system is to evaluate the performance levels of all employees. Evaluations of performance serve three purposes; they: 
1.	Allow employees to set standards for themselves from one evaluation period to the next; 
2.	Allow the supervisor to meet and with the employee to provide feedback to the employee about their employment and potential with the county; and 
3.	Provide a standard upon which advances in pay and promotions are made.
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.14.2 - Performance evaluations. 
During the anniversary month of the employee's employment with the county, the employee's supervisor shall complete a performance evaluation report on the employee. This report form shall be supplied by the County Administration. 
These forms shall become a permanent part of the employee's personnel record, and shall be signed by both the evaluator and the employee at the completion of the review with the employee. The performance evaluation shall be submitted to the County Administrator during the anniversary month of the employee. Responsibility for submission of performance evaluations shall be as follows: 
A.	By the County Administrator on all department heads.
B.	By department heads on all employees under their supervision.
C.	By the Commission on the County Administrator and the County Clerk.
In addition to the anniversary month of each employee, performance evaluations shall be made on the employee in the following instances: 
A.	When an employee is transferred from his/her department.
B.	At the end of an employee's probation period (six months). This procedure shall include both new and promoted employees. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.14.3 - Evaluation interviews. 
When the evaluator has completed the performance evaluation form, the employee shall be scheduled to talk with the evaluator. The evaluation interview shall be conducted during the month of the employee's anniversary date. During the course of the interview, the evaluator shall explore with the employee ways and means of improving performance and qualifying for advancement. 
The employee shall be given an opportunity to ask questions or make suggestions about his/her work, privileges, and performance as evaluated. The interview shall be conducted in a positive manner, as it is not intended to be critical of the employee, but an aid to understanding and rapport between the supervisor and the employee. At the conclusion of the interview, the employee shall be asked to sign and date the performance evaluation. Employees grieving the evaluation may so state on the form and appeal to the next higher supervisor as specified in §§ 32.8.7, 32.11.5, and 32.11.7. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.14.4 - Merit increases. 
Increases in pay shall not be automatic or across-the-board at the start of each fiscal year; all pay increases shall be based on, but not be limited to the criteria outlined below: 
A.	Employees will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
B.	The employee's performance evaluations must substantiate the merit increase.
C.	The difference between current and past performance as evidenced by previous performance evaluations, if applicable. 
D.	The employees' potential for improvement.
E.	Other increases in the employee's qualifications, as evidenced by certificates of further education, workshops and seminars attended and other such evidence. 
F.	Recommendations of the employee's supervisor.
G.	County Administrator shall notify, in writing, the Board of Commissioners of all merit raises granted. 
Merit raises must be recommended by the department head after justification and approved by the County Administrator. Such merit increases shall be effective beginning the first full pay period following the approval of any qualified employee's merit salary increase. The County Administrator shall not hold in abeyance for any reason any awarded merit increase. Department head, County Clerk and Administrator merit increases will be approved by the County Commission following the above guidelines. 
The granting of merit salary increases will in no way affect, nor be affected by cost of living increases (COLA) which may, from time to time, be granted by the County Commission on an across-the-board basis. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.14.5 - Cost of living adjustments (COLA). 
Cost of living adjustments may be granted by the County Commission from time to time. COLA's are only applicable to those employees with one year or more of service at the beginning of the fiscal year (October 1). At the discretion of the Clay County Board of Commissioners, COLA raises may be issued in a lump sum amount in lieu of a percentage increase. COLA increases shall become effective only at the beginning of the fiscal year and shall constitute an upward adjustment of the entire pay schedule. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 15. - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

Sec. 32.15.1 - Public inspection. 
Access to personnel records of employees covered under these policies and all other records and materials relating to the administration of the personnel system shall be governed by Georgia's Open Records Act except when access or denial of access to a record is governed by a specific law or authority or when in the opinion of the Personnel Director the release of information would create a potential risk of personal harm to the safety of the employee or his family members. Information, which is obtained in the course of official duties, shall not be released by any employee other than by those charged with this responsibility as part of official duties. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.15.2 - Disclosure. 
Subject to the restrictions stated in this Section, the following information relative to employees and former employees is available for public inspection during regular business hours and in accordance with such procedures as the Personnel Director may prescribe: 
A.	Name of employee.
B.	Job application and resume.
C.	Class title, position and salary.
D.	Disciplinary history, but not until ten days after the record has been presented for action, including appeal of a final adverse action, or the investigation is otherwise concluded. 
15.2.1. Nondisclosure. 
Records that are by their very nature confidential, private, privileged, or create a potential risk of harm to the safety of the employee or his family members will not be disclosed to the public, as follows: 
A.	Medical records and similar files.
B.	Social Security Number.
C.	Records that would reveal the home address, telephone number, or insurance information of law enforcement officers, judges, prosecutors, and or identification of immediate family members or dependents thereof. 
D.	Records of law officers and candidates for law officer required to be kept confidential pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-8-15. 
E.	Confidential evaluations submitted to, or examinations prepared by, the county and prepared in connection with the appointment or hiring of a public officer or employee. 
F.	Performance rating reports are accessible only to the department head concerned, the County Administrator, the appointing authority, the Board of Commissioners, and the employee involved. 
G.	Other personnel information may be made available for official purposes.
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.15.3. - Process of law; liability. 
A.	Nothing in this article shall give rise to a cause of action against the county, its officers, employees, or agents, nor shall anything in this article prohibit the release of information pursuant to process of law. 
B.	The county reserves the right, but does not assume the obligation, to balance the interest of the public in favor of inspection of documents against privacy interests and the interest of the public in favor of noninspection. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
DIVISION 16. - ADOPTION OF POLICIES 

Sec. 32.16.1. - Effective date. 
These policies shall become effective on the date adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners and shall remain in effect until duly amended. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.16.2 - Saving clause. 
If any article, section or other portion of these policies is found to be invalid by duly constituted authority, it shall not affect the validity of the balance of these policies. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Sec. 32.16.3. - Repeal clause. 
All laws or parts of laws and rules in conflict with the provisions of these policies are hereby repealed, including the Clay County Personnel Ordinance, of the Clay County Code of Ordinances, and the Clay County Personnel Policy as it exists on the date of adoption of the policies set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
ARTICLE II. ATTACHMENTS 

(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
ARTICLE II. ATTACHMENTS 

(Ord. of 9-2-2008)
Chapter 33 - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 33.01 - Standard operating procedures adopted by reference. 
The Standard Operating Procedures, copies of which are on file in the office of the Chairperson, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Res. of 4-17-2001)
Chapter 34 - COURTS 

Sec. 34.01 - Additional judge of superior court added. 
(A)	Under and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, one additional judge of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit of Georgia is added, thereby increasing to two the number of the judges of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit. 
(B)	The additional judge shall be appointed by the Governor for a term of office beginning on the first Monday following the date of his or her appointment and continuing through December 31, 1982, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The judge shall be appointed by the Governor within 30 days after the effective date of this Act. His or her successor shall be elected in a manner provided by law for the election of judges of the Superior Courts of this state at the general election in November 1982, for a term of four years beginning on the first day of January 1983, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. Future successors shall be elected at the general election each four years thereafter for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. They shall take office on the first day of January following the date of the election. Such elections shall be held and conducted in the manner provided by law for the election of judges of the Superior Courts of this state. 
(C)	The additional judge of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit of Georgia shall have and may exercise all powers, duties, jurisdiction, privileges and immunities of a judge of the court. 
(D)	The compensation, salary and allowances of the additional judge of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit of Georgia from the State of Georgia shall be the same as that of other judges of the Superior Courts of Georgia. 
(E)	Upon and after qualification of the additional judge of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit of Georgia, the two judges of the court may adopt, promulgate, amend and enforce such rules of practice and procedure in consonance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as they deem suitable and proper for the effective transaction of the business of the court, and in transacting the business of the court and in performing their duties and responsibilities, they shall share, divide and allocate the work and duties to be performed by each. In the event of disagreement among the judges in respect hereof, the decision of the senior judge in point of service shall be controlling. 
(F)	The judge of the court, senior in term of continuous service, shall be the presiding judge of the court, in whom is to vest the power to make all appointments whenever the law provides for the Superior Court Judge to make appointments. 
(G)	All writs, processes, orders, subpoenas and any other official paper issuing out of the Superior Court for the Pataula Judicial Circuit may bear test in the name of any judge of the Pataula Judicial Circuit and, when issued by and in the name of any judge of the circuit, shall be fully valid and may be heard and determined before the same or any other judge of said circuit. Any judge of the court may preside over any cause therein and perform any official act as judge thereof. 
(H)	Nothing enumerated in this section shall be deemed to limit or restrict the inherent powers, duties and responsibilities of Superior Court Judges provided by the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Georgia. 
(I)	This section shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without his or her approval. 
(J)	All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this section are repealed.
(Res. of 3-25-1981)
Chapter 35 - ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 35.01 - Citation for violation of ordinances. 
(A)	All ordinance violations may be tried upon citation with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. 
(B)	Each citation shall state the time and place at which accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court and shall identify the accused and be signed by authorized agent of the county. 
(C)	The Clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Clay County is designated as the agent of the county to issue citations. 
(D)	All citations shall be served by the Sheriff of Clay County or his or her lawful deputy.
(E)	The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused and a copy shall promptly be filed with the Magistrate Court of Clay County. 
(Res. of 4-5-1988)
Chapter 36 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28.

Sec. 36.01 - Adoption of National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The Clay County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents, and directs all incident managers and response organizations in Clay County, Georgia, train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. No. 06-003, 2-21-2006)
Sec. 36.02 - Lower Chattahoochee Regional E-911 Authority. 
(A)	The authority shall consist of nine members who shall be residents of Clay, Quitman, Randolph and Stewart Counties. Two of the members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Clay County for terms of office of four years each. Two of the members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Quitman County for terms of office of four years each. Two of the members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Randolph County for terms of office of four years each. Two of the members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Stewart County for terms of office of four years each. The eight members so appointed shall appoint a ninth member, who may be a resident of either Clay, Quitman, Randolph or Stewart County for a term of office of four years. Members of the authority shall serve the terms specified and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified; provided, however, that any member of the authority may be removed at any time by the governing authority which appointed such member, with or without cause. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. The initial appointments shall be effective as of July 1, 2006. After such appointment, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose term of membership resulted in such vacancy and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The members of the authority shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties out of funds of the authority. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(B)	To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall satisfy the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1. 
(C)	The members of the authority shall in July of each year elect one of their number as chairperson. Also, the members of the authority shall elect one of their number as vice chairperson, and may also elect one of their number as vice chairperson, shall also elect one of their number as secretary, and may also elect one of their number as treasurer. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The chairperson of the authority shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution. 
(D)	A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. 
(E)	A vacancy on the authority shall exist in the office of any member of the authority who is convicted of a felony or who enters a plea of nolo contendere, thereto; who is convicted of a crime involving mortal turpitude or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who moves such person's residence from Clay, Quitman, Randolph or Stewart County, who is convicted of any act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of such person's duties as a member of the authority; or who fails to attend any regular or special meeting of the authority for a period of three months without an excuse approved by a resolution of the authority. 
(Res. No. 06-009, 7-18-2006)
Sec. 36.03 - Predistaster hazard mitigation plan. 
The Clay County Commission formally adopts the predisaster hazard mitigation plan completed by Clay County and its municipal governments pursuant to the federal requirements of the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000. 
(Res. No. 06-014, 8-15-2006)
Chapter 37 - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 37.01 - Use of insurance premium tax. 
(A)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.3, the Clay County Board of Commissioners desires to designate the Insurance Premium Tax of Clay County to be used in the unincorporated areas of the County by the Solid Waste Department, at the rate of 60 percent of the total revenue received, and by the Planning and Zoning Department, at the rate of 20 percent of the total revenue received, and by the Fire Department, at the rate of 20 percent of the total revenue received. 
(B)	The Insurance Premium Tax shall offset the ad valorem tax base within the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(C)	The Insurance Premium Tax shall be kept separate from other County funds, and shall be used solely for the operation of the Solid Waste Department, the Planning and Zoning Department and the Fire Department. 
(D)	The Clay County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts this resolution for the use of the Insurance Premium Taxes collected within Clay County as herein stipulated. 
(Res. No. 06-010, 7-27-2006; Res. No. 07-014, 6-19-2007; Res. No. 09-040, 8-27-2009; Res. No. 10-052, 7-6-2010; Res. No. 11-028, 8-30-2011) 
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 37.21 - Occupation tax required for business dealings in Clay County. 
(A)	Any person who performs any business, occupation or profession subject to an occupation tax or regulatory fee under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. is required to provide the County the following information when paying their occupation tax or regulatory fee: 
(1)	The legal name of the business;
(2)	Any associated trade names for the business;
(3)	The mailing address for the business;
(4)	The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; 
(5)	NAICS-North American Industry Classification System Code; and
(6)	The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the Georgia Department of Revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. 
(B)	The County will provide written notice to all persons subject to occupation tax or regulatory fees and that: 
(1)	This information will be turned over to the Georgia Department of Revenue; or
(2)	If the person refuses or fails to provide the required information, the County will notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of this fact. 
(C)	Within 30 days after receiving the payment of occupation taxes or regulatory fees under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20, the County will electronically submit the information received from each business, to the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 1, 8-15-2006; Res. No. 10-083, 11-16-2010)
Sec. 37.22 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator shall mean that entity appointed by the Board of Commissioners who is responsible for the levy, assessment and collection of the occupational tax. 
Administrative fee is a component of an occupation tax, which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means: 
(1)	An individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation an I.R.S. form W-2 but not an I.R.S. form 1099; or 
(2)	An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner, which issues an I.R.S form W-2 to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation. 
Full-time employee means an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly. In determining the number of full-time employees, the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sums shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents, and each full-time position equivalent shall be considered a full-time employee for purposes of this division. Fractional equivalents shall be rounded down to the nearest whole. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location, which is the site of personal property, which is rented or leased from another, does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Number of employees means: 
(1)	For an occupation, profession, trade business or calling, operating and having a location within Clay County during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied, the number of full time employees shall be calculated based on the number employed on October 1st during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied. 
(2)	For an occupation profession, trade, business or calling not operating and having a business location within Clay County during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied, the number of full time employees will be calculated based on the average number employed during the first three months of operation at a location within Clay County. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on individuals, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Individual shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, either of which may or may not have one or more employees, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 2, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.23 - Administrative fee structure. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 3, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.24 - Occupation tax levied; occupational tax structure; restrictions. 
(A)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the Clay County and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(B)	Occupation tax schedule.

 
(C)	Restrictions on imposition of occupational tax:
(1)	No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)	No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agencies, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)	Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the number of employees engaged in substantial efforts in Georgia. 
(4)	Businesses with no employees and an annual gross income of less than $5,000.00 are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 4, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.25 - Determination of occupation tax for new business. 
If a business is begun for the first time on or after January first of any calendar year, the occupation tax levied and assessed against the business shall be determined as follows: 
(1)	In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1, the occupation tax and administrative fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(2)	The Administrator shall issue an occupation tax certificate for the calendar year in which the application is submitted, and the occupation tax shall be paid in accordance with §§ 37.24 and 37.26 except that if a new business begins for the first time after July 1st of the calendar year, then the occupation tax shall be 50 percent of the amount in the schedule set forth above. Administrative fees shall not be reduced for businesses commencing operation on or after July 1st. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 4.1, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.26 - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia; exemption for tax paid in another state. 
(A)	Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Clay County and the business or practitioner either: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Clay County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within Clay County. 
(B)	Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the State of Georgia shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this division if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business' or practitioner's sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 5, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.27 - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in Clay County shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 6, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.28 - Number of businesses considered to be operating in Clay County. 
Where an individual conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 7, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.29 - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)1—18. 
(A)	Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on number of employees.
(2)	A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The practitioner tax applies to each individual in the business that qualifies as a practitioner under the Georgia's guidelines. 
(B)	This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be made by January 1st of each year, if no such election is made; the occupation tax shall be based on number employees. 
Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations as listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18): 
(1)	Lawyers;
(2)	Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43, Ch. 34;
(3)	Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43, Ch. 34;
(4)	Chiropractors;
(5)	Podiatrists;
(6)	Dentists;
(7)	Optometrists;
(8)	Psychologists;
(9)	Veterinarians;
(10)	Landscape architects;
(11)	Land surveyors;
(12)	Practitioners of physiotherapy;
(13)	Public accountants;
(14)	Embalmers;
(15)	Funeral directors;
(16)	Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers;
(17)	Architects;
(18)	Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors.
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 8, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.30 - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed exclusively by the United States, State of Georgia, a municipality or county located in Georgia, shall not be required to pay an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 9, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.31 - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations, which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations may be taxed by Clay County pursuant to pertinent state and/or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 10, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.32 - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(A)	Each such occupation tax shall be for calendar year 2007 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided; said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1st of each year and shall, if not paid by January 1st of each year, be subject to a 1½ percent monthly penalty for delinquency. On any new profession, trade, business or calling begun in Clay County in 2007 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a 1½ percent monthly penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the Administrator and if any individual, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Clay County, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this division without having first obtained said registration such offender shall, upon conviction in the Magistrate Court, be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for a maximum of 180 days. 
(B)	In addition to the above remedies, the Administrator may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 11, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.33 - Exemption on grounds that business is a nonprofit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization having been designated as such under Section 501(c) 3 shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax under this division. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 12, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.34 - Exemption from payment of occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Subject to the limitations provided in this division, the following classes of persons may peddle, conduct business, or practice the professions and semi professions in Clay County without paying an occupation tax, provided such person receives a certificate of exemption issued by the Commissioner of Veterans Service: 
(1)	Any disabled veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)	Any blind person; or
(3)	Any veteran of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 13, 8-15-2006)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1. 
Sec. 37.35 - Evidence of qualification required. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 14, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.36 - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All individuals subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant, to this division shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this division, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such individuals shall be subject to the same penalty as other individuals who fail to obtain a registration. Every individual intending to commence business in Clay County after January 1st of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any action, transacting, or offering to transact in Clay County, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 15, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.37 - Issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers; criminal liability unaffected. 
(A)	In addition to the other remedies available to Clay County for the collection of occupation taxes from entities subject to the tax or fee that fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the Administrator shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)	The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; any penalty imposed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(a); 
(2)	Any interest imposed by this division shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(b).
(B)	The Magistrate Court of Clay County may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax. The penalty for violations shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 16, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.38 - Administrator; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The Administrator, or designee, shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the occupational tax ordinance of 2007 and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 17, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.39 - Business not covered by this division. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this division but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission.
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46 Ch. 3, Georgia Territorial Electric Service Act. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355, Exemption from municipal tax or license fee of certain goods purchased in carload lots for distribution among several purchasers. 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A § 48-5-356, Exemption from municipal taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(11)	Established churches, religious, charitable, and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. 
(12)	Persons located in Clay County who are subject to an occupation tax levied by the City of Fort Gaines shall not be required to register and pay an occupation tax so long as the business does not maintain a place of business located outside of the City of Fort Gaines. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 18, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.40 - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business, which was not conducted for any period of time in the jurisdiction of Clay County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. Where a taxpayer fails to make such payment on or before the due date for such payment, a 1½ percent penalty will be imposed for the balance of the month that payment is due and an additional penalty of 1½ percent penalty will be imposed for each additional month of delinquency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 19, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.41 - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax for each location and line. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 20, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.42 - Confidentiality. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of Clay County, to divulge or make known in any manner the particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax information required under this division. All contents of said information shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of Clay County using said information for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by Clay County shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by Clay County officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 21, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.43 - Businesses and practitioners required to provide certain information; inspections of books and records. 
(A)	All businesses and practitioners doing business within Clay County shall provide to the Administrator by January 1 of 2007 and each succeeding year thereafter: 
(1)	The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within Clay County; 
(2)	A description of the business or types of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at such location; and 
(3)	The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other county.
(B)	The Administrator shall have the right to inspect the payroll records. Upon demand of the Administrator such books or records shall be submitted within 30 days for inspection by a representative of Clay County. Failure to submit such payroll records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in Clay County. If, after examination of the payroll records, it is determined that a deficiency occurred as a result of under reporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount of deficiency will be assessed for the delinquent period. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the under reporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 22, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.44 - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns or permit inspection of books. 
(A)	Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said information available within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by Clay County under this division permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by Clay County for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records. In the case of those practitioners where Clay County cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by Clay County. 
(B)	No business tax registration or certification or renewal thereof shall be granted by Clay County for the operation of a business for which the owner of the business has remaining any delinquent ad valorem taxes due Clay County. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 23 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.45 - Effect of failure to comply with division provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any individuals, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in Clay County after the registration for said business has been revoked, as above, are hereby required to provide occupation tax information, and who fail to provide said information within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any individuals, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of payroll records in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the Clay County request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where Clay County cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by Clay County in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 24, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.46 - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the Administrator, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the individuals, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the individual, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances of Clay County and the laws of the State of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the Administrator upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances of Clay County and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the Administrator against any individual defaulting on the occupation tax, the individual against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the individual against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the individual may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 25, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.47 - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this division between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 26, 8-15-2006)
Sec. 37.48 - Distribution. 
Proceeds from the occupational taxes shall be designated for use as follows: 
General fund — 100 percent. 
(Ord. No. 06-004, § 29, 8-15-2006)
Chapter 38 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 38.01 - Program adoption. 
The Clay County Board of Commissioners operates a water and refuse collection system and an ambulance billing system through a third party ("utility") and developed this identity theft prevention program ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flag Rule ("rule") codified at 16 CFR § 681.2, which implements Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions (FACT) Act of 2003. This program was developed with oversight by the county administrator ("program administrator") and approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the board of commissioners has determined that this program was appropriate for the Clay County and therefore approved this program on April 21, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.02 - Program purpose and definitions. 
(A)	Fulfilling requirements of the red flag rule. Under the red flag rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. Each program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to: 
(1)	Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
(2)	Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
(3)	Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and 
(4)	Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(B)	Red flag rule definitions used in this program. The red flag rule defines "identity theft" as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person" and a "red flag" as "a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft". According to the rule, a county utility is a creditor subject to the rule requirements. The rule defines creditors to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors. All the utility's accounts that are individual utility service accounts held by customers of the utility whether residential, commercial or industrial are covered by the rule. Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)	Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)	Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft. 
"Identifying information" is defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person", including; name, address, telephone number, Social Security Number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address or routing code. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.03 - Identification of red flag. 
In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the following red flag, in each of the listed categories: 
(A)	Notifications and warnings from credit reporting agencies, when used red flag: 
(1)	Report of fraud accompanying a credit report;
(2)	Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant;
(3)	Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and
(4)	Indication from a credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity. 
(B)	Suspicious documents red flag: 
(1)	Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic;
(2)	Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
(3)	Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
(4)	Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
(C)	Suspicious personal identifying information red flag: 
(1)	Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates); 
(2)	Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
(3)	Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
(4)	Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
(5)	An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person;
(6)	Person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(D)	Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account red flag: 
(1)	Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
(2)	Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
(3)	Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity);
(4)	Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
(5)	Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility;
(6)	Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity;
(7)	Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
(8)	Unauthorized access to or use of customer account.
(E)	Alerts from others red flag: Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.04 - Detecting red flags. 
(A)	New accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
Detect: 
(1)	Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)	Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; and/or
(3)	Independently contact the customer.
(B)	Existing accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility personnel will take the following steps to extent possible to monitor transactions with an account: 
Detect: 
(1)	Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)	Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and
(3)	Verify changes in banking information given for payment purposes.
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.05 - Preventing and mitigating identity theft. 
In the event utility personnel detect red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag: 
Prevent and mitigate: 
(1)	Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
(2)	Contact the customer;
(3)	Not open a new account;
(4)	Close an existing account;
(5)	Reopen an account with a new number;
(6)	Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take;
(7)	Notify law enforcement; or
(8)	Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. Protect customer identifying information. 
In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
(1)	Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
(2)	Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
(3)	Ensure that office computers are password protected;
(4)	Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
(5)	Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and
(6)	Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.06 - Program updates. 
The program administrator will review and update this program at least once a year and as necessary to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the utility from identity theft. In doing so, the program administrator will consider the utility's experiences with identity theft situations, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other entities. After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will present the board of commissioners with his or her recommended changes and the county commission will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
Sec. 38.07 - Program administration. 
(A)	Oversight: Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity theft committee for the utility. The committee is headed by the program administrator or his or her appointee. One of the members should have detailed technical knowledge of the utility's computer information systems. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. 
(B)	Staff training and reports: Utility staff responsible for implementing the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected utility staff will provide reports to the program administrator on incidents of identity theft. Department heads are responsible to be familiar with the Identity Theft Protection Act and to meet with their staff to assess current compliance and document appropriate safeguard practices in writing. 
(C)	Service provider arrangements: In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more accounts, the utility will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft: 
(1)	Require that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and
(2)	Require that service providers review the utility's program and report any red flag to the program administrator. 
(D)	Nondisclosure of specific practices: For the effectiveness of this identity theft prevention program, knowledge about specific red flag identification, detection, mitigation and prevention practices must be limited to the identity theft committee who developed this program and to those employees with a need to know them. Any documents that may have been produced or are produced in order to develop or implement this program that list or describe such specific practices and the information those documents contain are considered "security information" (as defined in the following paragraph) and are unavailable to the public because disclosure of them would be likely to substantially jeopardized the security of information against improper use, that use being to circumvent the utility's identity theft prevention efforts in order to facilitate the commission of identity theft. 
"Security information" is defined as government data the disclosure of which would be likely to substantially jeopardize the security of information, possessions, individuals or property against theft, tampering, improper use, attempted escape, illegal disclosure, trespass or physical injury. 
(Ord. No. 09-012, § (a), 5-19-2009)
TITLE V - PUBLIC WORKS 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local solid waste regulation, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9.

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 50.01 - Creation of special tax district. 
There is created pursuant to Art. 9, Section 2, Paragraph 6 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia a Special Tax District which shall be known as Clay County Solid Waste Disposal Tax District, hereinafter referred to as the District. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994)
Sec. 50.02 - District boundaries. 
The District boundaries shall be all the property situated, lying and being in Clay County, including the unincorporated areas of Clay County and the incorporated areas of the City of Fort Gaines and the City of Bluffton. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994)
Sec. 50.03 - Amount and collection of taxes. 
(A)	The rates for garbage shall be established on an annual basis by majority vote of the Clay County Commission at least 30 days prior to the imposition of the rates, and the change in rates will not occur within 12 months of the previous rate change. 
(B)	The owner of the residential or commercial unit as determined from the published tax digest for Clay County shall be billed for the fee to be collected hereunder. The fee shall be collected for the entire tax year against the listed owner unless the Board of Commissioners are provided with the name, address and copy of the deed of conveyance. The fee shall be collected from the new owner commencing upon the first month following the conveyance, provided the above information is received on or before the fifteenth of the month of the conveyance or on the first day of the second month next that if received after the fifteenth of the month of conveyance. 
(C)	All residence units shall be defined as all occupied single- or multi-family dwelling units, including mobile homes and modular units. Multi-family structures such as duplexes and apartment buildings shall be billed as to each individual unit contained therein. All commercial units shall be defined as any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semi-public establishment of any kind. Factors to be used to determine if occupied shall include but not be limited to units that are serviced by electrical utilities, public sewage systems or individual septic systems. 
(D)	The fee shall be due and payable by the tenth of each month. A late payment penalty and an assessment of interest shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the prescribed time limits. Owners of each residential or commercial unit may pay the entire amount due for the tax year in advance if they so desire. Annual payments may only be made during the month of October. Annual payments are equal to 11 times the monthly rate at the time the annual payment is made. The 12th month is issued as a one month credit based on the current monthly rate at the time of the annual payment as an incentive to pay annually. 
(E)	(1)	The fees for collection of residential or commercial solid waste levied pursuant to the terms of this chapter and all late charges and interest accruing thereon are deemed and constituted a tax and are levied severally against the owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile home courts and/or trailer courts. The fees, late charges and interest prescribed in this section shall be determined and treated in all respects as provided by law with respect to ad valorem and state taxes. 
(2)	Uncollected fees, late charges and interest shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property upon which each residential unit is located on the personal property composing a residential unit and upon the personal property of the occupant of each residential unit until paid. Writs of Fieri Facias may be issued by the county for fees which are past due and collection may be effected as provided by law for ad valorem or other state taxes, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3 or other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994; Ord. of 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 05-117, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 06-001, 1-17-2006) 
Sec. 50.04 - Use of taxes and fees. 
All taxes and fees imposed by this chapter shall be used and appropriated to pay for the collection and disposal of all solid waste in the District. The taxes and fees shall be deposited in the Solid Waste Account of the Clay County General Fund for this purpose. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994; Am. Ord. 2-6-2001)
Sec. 50.05 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Contractor or business refuse. Roofing materials, lumber, masonry materials, paneling and wallboard items, window frames, packing cases and containers or holders, automobile and other machinery parts, powered tools and any other discarded items which through the nature of the material or size or volume of material would normally be associated with construction or other business enterprises. 
Dumpsters. Those receptacles as may be provided by the county and placed at various locations throughout the county area for depositing of refuse as outlined herein. 
Household garbage. Animal, vegetable and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as by products of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics and wrapping or packaging materials. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-47. 
(1)	As a general rule, those by products which could readily be placed and removed in a trash bag or similar container shall be deemed to be within this definition. Items generated by small businesses that fit this provision and that are of the nature of items defined above shall be considered appropriate for disposal in dumpsters. 
(2)	Items of automobile or equipment bodies automobile tires, large parts, refrigerators, washers, cabinet assemblies, furniture, mattresses, trees, tree limbs and trimmings, animals carcasses and similar materials are specifically exempt from the definition and are not authorized for disposal at dumpster sites. 
Litter. All sand, gravel, slag brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, synthetic food containers, bottles or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Public or private property. The right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores, banks or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
State Law reference— Similar provisons, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
(Ord. of 7-10-1984)
DIVISION 2. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 50.20 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Automobile graveyard. An establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicle parts. 
Dump. To throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Junk. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris or waste; junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; or iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
Junk vehicles. Any vehicle that cannot be moved by its own power and/or does not have an updated license plate. 
Junkyard. Any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying or selling junk or for an automobile graveyard. 
Litter. All discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined herein. 
Public or private property. The right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area and residential, commercial or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Scrap tires. All tires which are no longer suitable for their original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 (31). 
Scrap tires generator. Any person or business who generates scrap tires, as defined in Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management, being O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4-19(2.1). 
Tire retailer. Any person or business engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
State Law reference— Similar provisons, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
Waste. All discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62) or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of animal by-products, waste includes without limitation bottles, boxes, containers, papers and tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste or industrial solid waste which is non-hazardous, non-medical and in a form classified as solid waste by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The improper disposal of waste is a felony and not subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Sec. 50.21 - Waste disposal. 
(A)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(B)	It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw, leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter waste or scrap tires at any place in this county, including without limitation, any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county unless such litter or waste originates in this county and: 
(1)	The property is designated and permitted by the State of Georgia and/or by the Clay County Board of Commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and waste and the person is authorized to use such property; and 
(2)	The litter or waste is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; however, any litter or waste placed into such a receptacle or container installed on such property must not be allowed to accumulate for an unreasonable period of time, and in no event shall it be allowed to accumulate to the point of overflowing the container or receptacle. 
(C)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)	In or on any public highway, road, street, alley or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)	In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, stream or creek; or
(3)	In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(D)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers and tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in Ch. 391-3-4-19 and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the rules for solid waste management, Ch. 391-3-4 applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99 
Sec. 50.22 - Transporting litter and waste. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in Clay County hauling wet or moist litter or waste which leaks, flows freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(B)	It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public street or roadways in Clay County without suitable covering or other restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited on the roads or adjoining areas of the county. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99. 
Sec. 50.23 - Regulation of garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
(A)	All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(B)	Persons using garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(C)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container or receptacle. 
(D)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle.
(E)	No dead animals or animal parts shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle.
(F)	No person shall deposit large non-compactable articles in such containers or receptacles such as stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, mattresses, tires, large tree limbs, air conditioning units or similar items. 
(G)	No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such containers or receptacles. 
(H)	No person shall place or scatter litter or waste in or around such container or receptacles.
(I)	No person shall scavenge or collect items from in or around such containers or receptacles.
(J)	The following establishments are required to provide adequate litter receptacles for the use of their customers, employees and visitors: 
(1)	Supermarkets, convenience stores, restaurants, services stations, commercial establishments, garages, schools and churches; 
(2)	Work areas and institutions that have loading and unloading operations where packing and repacking are done; 
(3)	Contractors at construction projects for disposal of residue and employee lunch/coffee break discards. 
(K)	It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of or otherwise vandalize any container used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99 
Sec. 50.24 - Accumulation. 
(A)	No owner or occupant of any premises in the unincorporated areas of Clay County shall allow litter or waste to accumulate thereon. No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and permission from the applicable Regulatory Agency, including but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Protection Division and/or the Georgia Forestry Service. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(B)	No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation on his or her premises of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(C)	The conduct described in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this section for each day the garbage or waste material remains on such premises. 
(D)	Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of this section shall be issued a warning citation. Upon being issued a warning, a 30-day period will be allowed for the owner or occupant to correct the violation. If not corrected within 30 days, a citation shall be issued for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Sec. 50.25 - Control of junk yards. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain any junkyard, any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any public road or occupied dwelling except those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means or which are otherwise removed from sight so as not to be visible from the public roads or dwellings. 
(B)	The Clay County Sheriff or his or her designee shall have the authority for the removal and disposal of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof, when requested by the owner or when such motor vehicles are in such a condition that they constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance, notwithstanding the fact that such motor vehicles may be located upon private property. 
(C)	Nothing contained within this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any motor vehicle which is located within the premises of any junkyard complying with laws of this state relating to the licensing and regulation of motor vehicle junkyards. 
State Law reference— Similar provisons, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
(D)	Nothing contained within this chapter shall be deemed to apply to materials or equipment held for use in the operation of a farm or business. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99 
Sec. 50.26 - Recycling. 
The Clay County Board of Commissioners finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Clay County, in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the county and to reduce the overall solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of. Therefore, it is the policy of the Clay County Board of Commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Sec. 50.27 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Clay County Sheriff or his or her designee or other as designated by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. Any person or persons authorized to enforce this chapter shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this chapter, subject to the condition that to allow entry on private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this chapter must be visible from a public road or right-of-way or upon such officer having received a complaint by a resident of Clay County, Georgia alleging a violation of this chapter. The Magistrate Court of Clay County shall also be authorized to issue summons for hearing on alleged violation of the ordinance upon written accusation or any person sui juris alleging such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50.40 - Solid waste storage and collection. 
(A)	For purposes of this section, solid waste shall mean putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food, including food containers, and nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials, including waste paper, metals, cans, glass, plastics and/or other similar materials. 
(B)	All solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags or containers as may be supplied by the county or its designated collector. 
(C)	Containers or bags must be placed at the curbside of the nearest public road by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next collection day if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. Containers or bags from residential units must be moved from the curbside to a place in the side or rear of the unit within 24 hours of the collection. 
(D)	The county shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all solid waste (including recyclables) within the District either through employees of the county or by contract issued to a person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity shall collect, remove, transport or dispose of any solid waste (including recyclables) within the District except as provided for herein and except with the express permission of the county. 
(E)	Solid waste will be collected once each week from residential units on a day to be established by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. Frequency of collection for commercial units will be at least once per week. More frequent collections from commercial units may be required if sanitary conditions in and around the container dictate. 
(F)	The county or the designated collector may decline to collect any solid waste containing excess liquid that is not properly contained or is contained in unauthorized containers. 
(G)	The county or the designated collector shall not be responsible for collection of discarded building materials, dirt, rock, appliances, furniture or yard waste. 
(H)	Such wastes shall be the responsibility of the producer or owner of the unit upon which it lies. It shall be disposed of as may be required by law. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994)
Sec. 50.41 - Dumpster sites. 
(A)	Dumpsters provided by the county are normally placed at strategic locations for use by citizens of the county in disposing of refuse which is generated within the household. Unless specifically designated and marked otherwise, dumpsters are authorized for household garbage only. 
(B)	Sites may be developed from time to time for depositing other than types of refuse approved herein. These will be designated by appropriate signs. 
(C)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or material other than household garbage in any dumpster or at any dumpster site unless the particular dumpster or site has been designated and marked for other materials. 
State Law reference— Similar provisons, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-47(b). 
(D)	It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of or otherwise vandalize or damage any container provided by the county for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(E)	Any refuse which is not herein authorized to be placed in dumpsters shall be removed to the county landfill for disposal as determined by the landfill operator. Contractor and business representatives may be charged a fee for use of the landfill as established from time to time by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99. 
Sec. 50.42 - Dumping, depositing litter on public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in unincorporated areas of Clay County or any waters within the county unless: 
(A)	The property has been designated by the county for the disposal of such litter; and
(B)	The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container (dumpster) installed on such property; or 
(C)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 50.99. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, see O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
DIVISION 4. - SOLID WASTE TAX RATES 

Sec. 50.50. - Residential refuse taxes. 
Refuse Collection Tax Rates for all residences supplied with carts within Clay County shall be $192.00 annually, to be billed at the rate of $16.00 monthly. 
(Ord. No. 11-005, § (a), 12-6-2011)
Sec. 50.51. - Same; prepayment of refuse taxes. 
Residents have the option of paying their Refuse Taxes annually in a lump sum at the beginning of the fiscal year in October and November that they are current on their tax bill; residents so paying shall receive a discount of one-twelfth of the annual amount due. 
(Ord. No. 11-005, § (a), 12-6-2011)
Sec. 50.52. - Commercial collection rates. 
A.	Commercial Establishments Serviced with Carts: Per cart:

 
B.	Commercial Establishments Serviced with Dumpsters:

 
(Ord. No. 11-005, § (a), 12-6-2011)
Secs. 50.53—50.98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 50.99 - Penalty. 
(A)	Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in section 10.99 of this Code. 
(B)	Each violation of any provision of section 50.40 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or 60 days' imprisonment in the Clay County jail, or both. Ordinance violations may be tried upon citations with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 5-10-60 et seq. Citations shall be issued by the County Administrator or his or her designee. 
(C)	Any person who violates sections 50.41 and 50.42 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	By a fine not less than $25.00 and not more than $300.00;
(2)	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, including the Magistrate Court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he or she has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the Judge of the Court in which conviction is obtained, including the Magistrate Court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he or she has deposited litter, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
(4)	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating sections 50.41 and 50.42. 
(D)	(1)	Penalty.
(a)	Any person, firm or corporation violating § 50.20 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Magistrate Court of Clay County, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; and/or 
(b)	The court may order the publication of the name of persons convicted of violating this chapter; 
(c)	In the case of improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this chapter. Clay County shall not be responsible for any cost of cleanup or remediation. At the discretion of the Clay County Board of Commissioners, Clay County may clean the property and charge the landowner for the cleanup cost. 
(2)	Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. In the event that any person, firm or corporation violates any provision of this chapter, the County Attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(3)	Evidence of violations.
(a)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited or dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated section 50.20 et seq. 
(b)	Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of section 50.20 et seq. is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttal presumption that such person has violated section 50.20 et seq. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1984; Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Chapter 51 - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISONS 

Sec. 51.01 - User fee rates. 
(A)	A fee schedule has been enacted for the Clay County Water System. This schedule is comprised of rates for residential and commercial users by volume. 
(B)	The schedule of rates shall be as follows:

 

 
(C)	The rate schedule shall be in force at the opening of the water system.
(Ord. No. 03-101, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 51.02 - Overhead sprinkler systems. 
The charge for any overhead sprinkler systems installed in any facilities in the county other than single family residences shall be $20.00 per month for any area up to and including 10,000 square feet and $2.00 per additional 1,000 square feet. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
Sec. 51.03. - Tap-in fees. 
(A)	Water and wastewater tap-in fees shall be charged on the basis of residential units or residential equivalent units according to the tap-in fees listed hereinafter. Any fractional units resulting from the calculation of residential equivalent units shall be treated as a whole unit. In addition to the tap-in fees, installation fees shall be charged in accordance with schedules listed hereinafter. Installation fees shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to location to be served; the actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap-in and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer or customers at whose request the connection is made. Water tap-in fees shall be charged as follows: $750.00 for each residential unit or residential equivalent unit. 
(B)	The water tap-in fee for connecting to water mains for fire protection purposes within county limits shall be as follows: 

 
(C)	The Administrator may authorize licensed master plumbers to install connections to water or wastewater facilities upon written application. Water meters shall be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers at cost; all other related accessories for water or sewer connections may be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers. The Administrator shall require payment of installation fees as listed herein or reimbursement of actual costs for any installations not specifically covered. All work done by other than county personnel shall be done only under the supervision of licensed master plumbers authorized to perform such work. The Administrator shall require that all installation is performed in accordance with specifications and/or standards conforming to sound engineering practices; in the event that such installation is not made in accordance with specifications and/or standards, the Administrator may require the installation to be corrected or removed and reinstalled as necessary. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
Sec. 51.04 - Installation fees. 
(A)	Installation fees shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to location to the be served, the actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap-in and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer or customers at whose request the connection is made. 
(B)	Water installation fees for making taps into the county water mains or water lines and installing water meters or providing water meters for plumbers to install shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(C)	Installation fees for meters larger than two inches shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the county for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
(D)	Charges for any installation not covered in standard pricing shall be calculated in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(E)	All hourly charges shall include travel time to and from the job location. Work performed outside regular business hours at the request of customers shall be charged at 150 percent of the rates in the schedule. Miscellaneous charges shall include actual charges for equipment rented to perform the work. The above schedule shall also be used to calculate charges when county staff or equipment is used on private facilities. The staging charge shall be used for construction but may be waved for other types of work at the discretion of the Administrator. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
Sec. 51.05 - Charges for miscellaneous services. 
If any action taken by unauthorized persons inside a meter box causes damages to a curb stop or a cover or lock connected to a curb stop, the resident or customer responsible for the premises shall be charged a fee of $75.00 for each incident in addition to other fees and charges. Damages to a meter and/or electronic devices shall be charged a fee of $600.00 for each incident in addition to other fees and charges. 
Sec. 51.06 - Deposits, late fees and service charges. 
(A)	Deposits shall be 2½ times the average monthly bill for all services, as estimated by the Administrator using whatever data may be available, with a minimum deposit of $50.00 per service account. 
(B)	In the event a utility bill has not been paid by the past due date printed on the bill, the account shall be subject to an additional late fee of 10 percent of the balance owed and not less than $5.00. Late fees may be incurred whether or not the service is disconnected. 
(C)	In the event that service has been cut off for nonpayment of any authority utility bill or other action resulting in unauthorized use of county services, service shall not be restored until the unpaid bill and service fees provided by this section are satisfied. Before service is restored, the following service fees shall be paid by the user cumulatively for each action taken to prevent unauthorized use of county services: 
(1)	Delinquent cut-off .....$ 35.00 
(2)	Locking meter .....45.00 
(3)	Removal of meter .....100.00 
(4)	Removal of straight line .....200.00 
(5)	Removal of unauthorized relocated meter .....250.00 
(6)	Cutting off water at main .....500.00 
(D)	Payment of these fees shall not exempt any user from any civil or criminal action resulting from violations of this chapter. 
(E)	In addition to the fees and deposits otherwise provided hereinabove, each applicant for service shall pay in advance an account establishment charge of $15.00 for transfer of service from one location to another. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
Sec. 51.07 - Residential equivalent units. 
(A)	A residential equivalent unit is that portion of a user's facility that has an impact on the water and wastewater system equivalent to a single family residence. The determination of a facility's residential equivalent units shall be based on estimated water consumption as shown in guidelines below or on square footage. Peak water consumption of 300 gallons per day or a floor space of 3,000 square feet, shall be the equivalent of one residential unit. The method which results in the greater number of equivalent residential units shall be applied. The standards in the table below shall be used in the determination of water consumption. If the table does not provide information for a particular application, the estimated water consumption shall be as calculated by the Administrator in accordance with sound engineering practices using information available from Georgia EPD, USEPA, or standard reference materials commonly used for estimating flows. 

 
** Add 300 gallons per machine to amount indicated if laundry or dish washing machines are installed. In the event a facility is made up of more than one smaller component facility, the determination of residential equivalent units shall be calculated as the sum of all components' residential equivalent units. 
(B)	Notwithstanding, in a case involving a site utilizing its own private water supply and distribution system to multiple locations resulting in the production of domestic type wastewater only, such as employee restrooms and showers, such that reading and maintenance of meters would create excessive costs and hardship in the judgment of the Administrator, the County may bill on flow estimates calculated on the basis of an average flow per employee times the average number of employees at such facility for the recovery of costs of transporting and treating the wastewater. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
Sec. 51.08. - Adjustments in billing. 
(A)	No adjustment will be made for any leaks on water services to residents that occur on the customer's side of the meter. 
(B)	The table of fees may be modified, revoked, or supplemented by Board approval by majority vote for the modification, revocation, or supplementation. Future fee changes, modifications may be reflected in the Clay County Fee Schedule as per Resolution 07-010. 
(Res. No. 08-018, 4-1-2008)
DIVISION 2. - WATER SYSTEM SUBSCRIPTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 51.11 - Subscriptions to be voluntary. 
The County Commission hereby declares it their policy that all subscriptions to the Clay County Water System (hereinafter, "the system"), current and future, are and shall remain purely voluntary; no resident or business within the unincorporated county shall be required to connect to the system. 
(Ord. No. 04-110, 8-17-2004)
Sec. 51.12 - Requests to subscribe. 
The system shall be required to accept any subscription requests to the system, notwithstanding that a water subscription request in an area not then-currently serviced with water need not be honored until a main has been constructed that can service said subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 04-110, 8-17-2004)
Sec. 51.13 - Minimum subscription period. 
No subscriber shall be charged for water until such time as a meter has been installed and the water is made available to that meter. Once water has been made available, the subscriber agrees, through the subscription agreement, to pay at least the minimum bill for a period of 24 months; this charge shall be required whether or not the subscriber actually has connected to the meter. After the mandatory billing period, any subscriber shall have the right to come off the system and cease payments. 
(Ord. No. 04-110, 8-17-2004)
Sec. 51.14 - Continuation of private well systems. 
No current or future subscribers of the system shall be compelled to abandon any wells on their properties that otherwise meet legal standards for water within the State of Georgia. System users may, at any time, drill, maintain, and keep wells on their property, insofar as said wells are not in any way connected to the public water system. 
(Ord. No. 04-110, 8-17-2004)
Chapter 52 - ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of counties with respect to county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42.

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 52.01 - Names of roads within the unincorporated county. 
(A)	The Clay County Commission does hereby name all U.S. and state highways, and all county roads within the confines of Clay County as follows. 

 
(B)	Naming roads not listed herein.
(1)	County roads in existence at the time of the naming of the roads as per subsection (A) above, with or without a County Road number, but by omission not on said list, will receive a name from the County Commission after consultation with residents on said roads. 
(2)	Private roads with three or more houses shall also receive a road name in the same manner as in subsection (B)(1) above. 
(C)	Subsequent developments. Developers of all subdivisions, following consultations with the county administration, shall provide names to the county for all roads in that subdivision; in addition, developers shall be required to erect street signs therein prior to acceptance by the county of said streets. 
(Ord. No. 03-105, 8-5-2005; Am. Ord. 03-106, 9-2-2003; Am. Ord. 03-107, 9-16-2003)
DIVISION 2. - CULVERTS AND DRAINAGE 

Sec. 52.10 - Establishment of policy. 
(A)	It is hereby declared that it is the policy of the Board of County Commissioners that the Department of Public Works shall install driveway culverts for private property within the unincorporated county in order to provide adequate access to that property, under the stipulations as herein provided. 
(B)	These provisions shall apply to residential properties only, and shall not pertain to commercial establishments, nor to agricultural endeavors, nor to developers for profit of any subdivisions within the county, which responsibility shall reside with said developers. 
However, in the event actions by the county in maintaining its rights-of-way deny to the adjoining landowner; whether residential, commercial, agricultural or recreational; access to the landowner's property, the county shall comply with § 52.10 (A) provided the landowner had access prior to the county's actions. 
(C)	All payments as required in § 52.11 hereunder shall be received by the county prior to commencement of any work. 
(Ord. No. 03-103, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-011, § (a), 2-3-2009)
Sec. 52.11 - Stipulations for provision of drain pipes. 
The following stipulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(A)	The standard dimensions of culvert pipe supplied at county expense shall be no larger than 24 feet long by 18 inches in diameter; the property owner shall be responsible for the payment of the differential for any pipe larger than this standard. 
(B)	The property owner shall be responsible for paying for any flaring or safety end sections that may be required by the Georgia Department of Transportation for pipes installed on state rights-of-way, or for the property owner's own convenience. 
(C)	The county will furnish no more than three dump truck loads (approximately 15 cubic yards) of dirt for backfill; all backfill in excess thereof shall be at the property owner's expense. 
(D)	The county will not remove any trees or stumps located in the area of the proposed driveway. The property owner shall be responsible for the removal of all trees and stumps within the proposed driveway which may inhibit a free flow of traffic onto the private property. 
(E)	The county shall make a site inspection to ensure that the location of the proposed driveway and pipe(s) will not disrupt natural drainage nor send drainage onto adjacent properties. 
(F)	The cost of labor and equipment to install the first pipe shall be borne by the county; labor and equipment costs of any additional pipes shall be borne by the property owner. 
(G)	Property owners requesting the county to install driveway culverts on state-maintained rights-of-way shall ensure that all Georgia DOT permits are obtained prior to the county performing any work. 
(H)	It shall be the responsibility of the property owner prior to the county performing any work to obtain any and all bonds and insurance that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 03-103, 8-5-2003)
Sec. 52.12 - Standards for installation. 
(A)	The county shall require that a site inspection be performed by the county whenever a driveway culvert is privately installed. 
(B)	Standard minimum requirements for installation will be drawn up by the Public Works Department, which requirements must be met prior to acceptance by the county. 
(Ord. No. 03-103, 8-5-2003)
Sec. 52.13 - Maintenance of driveway culverts. 
The county shall assume responsibility for the maintenance of all culvert pipes installed on non-state-maintained public rights-of-way under this provision, including such pipes installed at the expense of the property owner; drainpipes installed by the property owner or his contractor shall also be maintained by the county provided that such culverts have been installed in a manner approved by the Clay County Department of Public Works. Culvert pipes installed on state rights-of-way shall be maintained by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 03-103, 8-5-2003)
Chapter 53 - HARVESTING TIMBER 

Sec. 53.01 - Applicability. 
(A)	This chapter of the Code of Ordinances, Clay County, Georgia, shall apply to all persons, firms and or entities harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of Clay County, Georgia, for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or other related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state. 
(B)	It is not intended, however, for this chapter to apply to small tree trimming, removal and/or clean-up operations involving the subject property's owner(s), the owner's respective agents or other contracted businesses such as tree surgeons, tree trimming and/or removal, storm related clean-up, and/or landscaping for which the primary purpose of the tree trimming, removal, and/or clean-up is not for the harvesting of timber. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.02 - Bond required. 
(A)	In accordance with the authority provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, any person, firm or entity engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in any unincorporated area of Clay County, Georgia, for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or other related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state shall first deliver to the Clay County Board of Commissioners office a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation or other legal surety entity authorized to transact business in this state in the amount of no less than $5,000.00 per permit entrance to protect the Clay County Road System against any damage caused by such person, firm or entity; or, in the alternative and at the option of the person, firm or entity intending to harvest said timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit in an amount no less than $5,000.00 issued by a bank or other financial institution as defined by O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4 may be submitted to the Clay County Board of Commissioners in lieu of the valid surety bond. 
(B)	As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, the surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit required under this section shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is delivered and no more than one year from the date said bond/letter of credit is delivered to Clay County. 
(C)	While said surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit shall not be valid for more than one year from the date of delivery to Clay County, said bond and/or letter of credit may be transferred for the purposes of securing another permitted location as many times as may be approved by Clay County during the calendar year that the original bond and/or letter of credit was delivered to Clay County. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.03 - Notice required. 
(A)	No person, firm or entity harvesting standing timber in Clay County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard, processing plant or related enterprise or property located inside or outside this state shall begin to cut, remove or harvest standing timber in any unincorporated area of Clay County without first providing notice of such harvesting operations to the Public Works Department or other designated agent for Clay County, Georgia at least 72 hours prior to cutting, removing or harvesting any such timber. 
(B)	Said 72-hour prior notice shall be required to be in writing and will be required from any person, firm or entity harvesting timber as described herein; and, shall be required for each separate tract to be harvested by said person, firm or, entity. The form of said notice shall be prescribed by such rule or regulation adopted by the Clay County Board of Commissioners or public works director and shall consist of: 
(1)	A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those tracks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)	A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation per O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)	The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)	The name, business address, business telephone number, current business registration and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(C)	Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile or such other means as approved by Clay County, or by mail. 
(D)	The failure of any person, firm or entity to provide the surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit as provided in this chapter shall render the notice as required in this section ineffective for any such harvesting operation(s) unless and until said person, firm or entity providing said notice has delivered to the Public Works Department the required valid surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit. 
(E)	Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of Clay County upon receipt of the same by the public works department or its designated agent and, compliance with the requirements of section 53.02 above and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the public works department or Clay County Board of Commissioners or its designated agent; within three business days after such change. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.04 - Ingress and egress permit, inspection and related requirements. 
(A)	For any ingress or egress identified by any harvester pursuant to the notice requirements set forth above and if said ingress and egress so identified shall cross any right-of-way of Clay County, the harvester shall be required, in addition to obtaining an ingress/egress permit described below, to comply with the following temporary harvesting driveway requirements: 
(1)	Gravel the temporary harvesting driveway with a minimum pad of 30 feet in width for the first 20 feet from the entrance and then no less than 20 feet after the first 20 feet from the entrance for 100 feet with 5-inch to 8-inch size stone, unless another size shall be approved by Clay County, to a minimum depth of three inches to insure that mud and/or other obstructions will not be tracked onto the county roadway. This chapter, however, shall not waive or otherwise negate any requirements by state law along state highways. All ingress and egress used by the harvester as a temporary harvesting driveway shall be maintained during the entire harvesting operation. All temporary harvesting driveways shall be piped by the harvester; and, upon completion of the harvesting, said pipe(s) shall be removed and the right-of-way(s) returned to its original condition by the harvester. 
(2)	No harvester or vehicle may be parked on a county right-of-way or used on the county right-of-way as a loading facility. 
(3)	Entrance/egress/ingress signs shall be placed no less than 1,000 feet in each direction from each permitted entrance. 
(B)	Any person, firm or entity harvesting timber as described by this chapter shall be required to obtain an ingress/egress permit from the public works department and pay a permit fee in such an amount as determined to be reasonable by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(C)	For any ingress or egress identified by any harvester pursuant to the notice requirements set forth above, Clay County shall schedule the requisite inspection within the 72-hour period referenced in section 53.03 above. The related permit(s) shall be issued or denied upon the completion of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.05 - Violations. 
Each violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be enforceable by Clay County and punishable by a fine of $500.00 for each violation. Each and every day any violation under this chapter continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.06 - Severability. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall be judged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.07 - Conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances codified in the Code of Ordinances, Clay County, Georgia, that may be in conflict with this chapter are hereby expressly repealed, amended or supplemented in order to resolve any said conflict. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
Sec. 53.08 - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be April 1, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 07-002, 2-6-2007)
TITLE VII - TRAFFIC CODE 
(RESERVED) 
TITLE IX - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Chapter 90 - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 90.01 - Policy. 
It is the policy of Clay County that no person shall be discriminated against in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of race, sex, age or national origin. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Sec. 90.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice. Any act which is prescribed under § 90.03. 
Dwelling. Any building, structures or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Family. Includes a single individual. 
Person. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers. 
To rent. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Sec. 90.03 - Exceptions. 
(A)	Nothing in subsection (A) or any other section shall apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner: 
(1)	Provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
(2)	Provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale; the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
(3)	Provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owed or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
(4)	Provided further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this section only if such house is sold or rented: 
(a)	Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent salesperson or person; 
(b)	Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of § 90.04, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(B)	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)	He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as a principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwellings or any interest therein; 
(2)	He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)	He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by or occupied by five or more families. 
(C)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this section prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Sec. 90.04 - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
As made applicable by this chapter, it shall be unlawful: 
(A)	To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion or national origin; 
(B)	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin; 
(C)	To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion or national origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(D)	To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion or national origin that any such dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(E)	For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 90.05 - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion or national origin of such person or any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose of such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, leases, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in § 90.03. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 90.06 - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions or such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 90.07 - Administration, authority and responsibility. 
(A)	It shall be the responsibility of the Chairperson and County Commissioners to enforce and administer this chapter. 
(B)	The Chairperson and County Commissioners may delegate any of their functions in the administration of this chapter to the county's staff. 
(C)	The Chairperson shall investigate any complaints arising under this chapter and shall present the findings within 30 days to the County Commissioners. 
(D)	Within the 30-day period, any person accused of having violated this chapter may appeal the findings before the County Commission; provided that request for appeal be presented in writing describing the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1979)
Chapter 91 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 91.01 - Georgia Department of Transportation Standards. 
The Clay County Board of Commissioners do affirm and adopt the Georgia Department of Transportation Standards for county roads. 
(Res. of 2-2-1999)
Sec. 91.02 - County maintenance of rights-of-way. 
(A)	Clay County claims a maintenance right-of-way on all public roads in Clay County.
(B)	The maintenance right-of-way shall be at least 20 feet on each side of the centerline of the public roads. 
(Res. of 3-3-1981)
Sec. 91.03 - Roads built to department of transportation standards. 
(A)	All roads in subdivisions in Clay County, built to be turned over to the county for public use, shall be built to Department of Transportation standards. 
(B)	The County Commissioners will not accept any roads in the future that are not built to Department of Transportation standards. 
(Res. of 3-4-1980)
Chapter 92 - ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 92.01 - Authority, designation of funds, jurisdiction. 
(A)	Authority. The general authority for this chapter is O.C.G.A. § 31-19-2, which authorizes and requires governing authorities of each county and municipality to require regulation and licensing of certain animals in the interest of rabies control. The Clay County Board of Commissioners shall monitor the operation of animal control and enforcement and render such guidance and assistance as is deemed appropriate in order to encourage responsible pet ownership. Proposals and recommendations shall normally be presented during regularly scheduled Commission meetings. Matters that need immediate attention should be referred to the Animal Control Officer, County Health Department or Sheriff's Department. 
(B)	Designation of funds. Funds derived from penalties, impoundment fees and other sources related to enforcement of provisions of this chapter shall be remitted to the Board of Commissioners. 
(C)	Jurisdiction. The county's jurisdiction for the enforcement of this chapter shall be the unincorporated area of the county. Any municipality may contract or enter into agreement with the county for joint animal control services or for the provision of animal control services required by this chapter and for the separated or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.02 - Animal Control Officer training, equipment, records. 
(A)	Training. The Animal Control Officer shall undergo a period of training in which he or she shall familiarize himself or herself with the provisions of this chapter and the fundamental requirements of such constitutional protections as probable cause in order to ensure that the rights of private citizens shall be guaranteed during the enforcement of this chapter. 
(B)	Equipment. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to employ any equipment deemed necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter as approved by the County Administrator. Any trap used must be of a humane nature, including wire box traps, and the Animal Control Officer may loan such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(C)	Records. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.03 - Definitions. 
(A)	Except as specifically defined in this section, all words in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. 
(1)	Words used in the present tense include future tense.
(2)	Words used in the singular tense include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)	The words "shall," "will" and "require" always mean mandatory.
(4)	The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(B)	For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Animal. Any description of vertebrate, excluding Homo sapiens. 
Animal control officer. An individual selected by the Board of Commissioners to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal shelter. Any facility operated for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other animals; any veterinary hospital that operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
At large. Any animal when off the premises of the owner and is not under the control of a responsible person. 
Bird. Any animal belonging to a class of warm-blooded vertebrates with wings and feathers, flying and non-flying. 
Cat. Any member of the species Felis Catus, four months of age or older and includes both male and female. 
Cruelty. Every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
Dog. All animals of the species Canis familiaris, four months of age or older and includes both male and female. 
Fence. A fenced enclosure constructed with sufficient height, strength and secure closing devices to adequately secure the animal(s) contained therein. 
Fowl. The same as bird. 
Humane manner. The care of an animal to include, but not limited to, safety, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, fresh food and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Impoundment. The capture and retention of an animal in or at an animal shelter. 
Kennel. A retail or wholesale activity, maintained for the purpose of offering any service whatsoever, including but not limited to boarding, grooming, breeding, keeping for sale, selling, trading, training or renting or leasing for guard purposes any dogs or other animals. Veterinary hospitals or clinics are excluded. 
Livestock. Any domestic animal raised for home use or for profit. 
Nuisance. Any animal that: 
(a)	Causes damage or unsanitary conditions on private property (other that the property of the owner of the animal) or public property and recreational areas; 
(b)	Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; 
(c)	Chases vehicles;
(d)	Howls, yelps, whines or barks in such manner as to unreasonably disturb any person or neighborhood; 
(e)	Attacks other animals or fowl on the property of another or on public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks and recreation areas; 
(f)	Female dogs or cats, when in breeding season, to roam and run free beyond the limits of the owner's property; and 
(g)	Any animal to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, except dogs trained specifically to assist a person with a disability when such dog is actually being used by a disabled person as an aid for that disability. 
Owner/ownership. Any natural person or legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning or having an interest in, harboring or keeping, feeding, sheltering or allowing animals to remain in or about the premises for three consecutive days or more. Kennel keepers, veterinarians, professional groomers, pet shop owners or similar entrepreneurs who keep animals as inventory or professionally render services thereto are not considered owners within the scope of this chapter if acting in such a capacity. 
Rabies vaccination tag. A serially numbered tag, approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, which is issued by a veterinarian to the owner of a dog or cat at the time of vaccination, along with a certificate of rabies vaccination. 
Responsible person. Any accountable human being. 
Unattended. An animal on the owner's property and not confined thereto by fence, chain or other suitable and effective means and when no responsible person is available to control such animals if said animal has been observed on public property or private property other than property of the owner. 
Vaccinate. The injection of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal. 
Veterinary clinic. A clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious. Savagely aggressive. 
Wild carnivore. Any normally undomesticated member of the order carnivore. This includes but is not limited to foxes, skunks, raccoons, coyotes and bobcats (lynx). 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 92.20 - Rabies vaccinations. 
(A)	Health regulations incorporated. All rules and regulations of the County Board of Health and the Georgia Department of Human Resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(B)	Responsibility. The owner or person having control of any dog or cat shall be responsible for complying with the laws of the State of Georgia as they apply to rabies vaccination and control. 
(C)	Requirement to display rabies vaccination tag. 
(1)	Dogs. The rabies vaccination tag issued for a dog shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the dog at all times, except under the special circumstances authorized below. The owner shall be required to produce evidence of the rabies vaccination upon the request of an officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department or Law Enforcement Department. 
(a)	A dog, while confined within the owner's house or apartment, is exempt from wearing the rabies tag. 
(b)	Hunting or stock dogs and show dogs while being worked, conditioned, groomed and/or shown under the direct supervision and control of their owner, agents or employees of the owner are exempt from wearing the rabies tag. 
(c)	A dog, which for medical or physical reason is unable to wear a collar or harness, is exempt from wearing the rabies tag. Documentation from a licensed veterinarian must be presented as proof for this exemption. 
(2)	Cats. The wearing of rabies tags by cats shall be left to the discretion of the owners. If tags are not worn, evidence of vaccination must be produced upon the request of an officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.21 - Cruelty to animals. 
(A)	Neglect, pain, suffering or injury. It shall be unlawful for any person, by neglect or otherwise, to cause or allow any animal to endure pain, suffering or injury or to fail or neglect to aid or attempt alleviation of any pain, suffering or injury caused to any animal. Acts violating this section shall include, but not limited to: 
(1)	Failure to provide adequate shelter from all types of weather;
(2)	Failure to provide animals food for a period of more than 24 hours and/or water or care for more than 18 hours; 
(3)	Abandoning any animal on private or public property;
(4)	Leaving or exposing any poison substance, food or drink for man, animal or fowl or to aid or abet any person in so doing, except insect or rodent poison when used for control of insects, mice or rodents. 
(B)	Bait, attack, provoke or harass. It shall be unlawful for any person to bait, attack with violence, provoke or harass an animal, domestic or wild, with one or more animals or humans, for the purpose of training such an animal for, or to cause to sponsor or to promote such an animal to engage in fights, wrestling or similar contests with or among other animals or between animals and humans. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent: 
(1)	The lawful training of guard dogs or other animals, provided the same in no way conflicts with other provisions of this chapter or the Georgia Code Annotated; or 
(2)	Any equine activity as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-12-2.
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 92.22 - Removal of collars or identifying items or marks on animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without the express permission of the owner or lessee of an animal to remove a collar, tag, tattoo or any identification mark artificially attached to or imprinted on an animal for the purposes of identification which causes or is likely to cause the loss of the animal to the owner thereof. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71. 
Sec. 92.23 - Control of dogs and cats; nuisance animals. 
(A)	Owner responsibility. The owner shall be held responsible for the actions of all domesticated animals under his or her ownership, custody, supervision or control. 
(B)	Leash required in public parks. Without regards to other provisions of this chapter or other sections of the Clay County Code, it shall be unlawful for owners of dogs or cats to allow, permit or by negligence fail to prevent such animals from being in public parks and recreation areas, unless restrained by a leash and under the control of a responsible person. 
(C)	Nuisance animals. 
(1)	Impoundment. Dogs or cats determined to be a nuisance may be subject to impoundment based upon the determination of the Animal Control Officer and depending upon the nature of the nuisance. 
(2)	Reporting and investigating. Upon receipt of nuisance complaints, the Animal Control Officer shall make an investigation to determine the validity of such complaint. After three such incidents where investigation has proven complaints to be accurate, the dog or cat will be classified as a nuisance animal. 
(3)	Notification. Upon classification of a nuisance animal, the Animal Control Officer shall make a reasonable effort, which shall include but not be limited to the mailing of a notice by certified mail to notify the owner of such determination. Said notice shall: 
(a)	Include a summary of the Animal Control Officer's finding;
(b)	Be dated and state that the owner, within 14 days after the date of the notice, has a right to request, in writing to the Clay County Board of Commissioners, a hearing of the determination; 
(c)	State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the Clay County Board of Commissioners;
(d)	State that if a hearing is not requested, the determination will become effective, for all purposes, on a date specified in the notice, which shall be the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing as specified above. 
(4)	Hearing scheduled; notice. Upon receipt of request for a hearing, the hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after receiving the request. The Clay County Board of Commissioners shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail at least ten days prior to the date, time and place of the hearing indicated in the notice. 
(5)	Notification of determination. Within ten days after the hearing, the Clay County Board of Commissioners shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. 
(6)	Registration. If a dog or cat has been determined to be a nuisance by the Clay County Board of Commissioners, or by the Animal Control Officer when no hearing was requested, it shall be required of the owner to register the animal with the Animal Control Office within five days of the determination notice. 
(7)	Registration fee. Upon registration of a nuisance animal, the owner shall pay an annual fee of $15.00. Registration shall be renewed annually during the month of initial registration. 
(8)	Move out of county. Upon moving out of the county, the owner shall notify the Animal Control Office of the move. Notice shall indicate whether or not the nuisance animal moved with the owner or was sold, donated or relocated. 
(9)	Change of ownership. Upon the nuisance animal being sold, donated or relocated, the former owner shall provide the Animal Control Officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the nuisance animal. 
(10)	Penalties. Upon receipt of continued complaints and verification of the complaints, the owner of an animal which has been determined to be a nuisance will be subject to the penalties contained in § 92.99. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.24 - Liability of owner for damages done to livestock or poultry by dog. 
(A)	Liability of owner. The owner or custodian exercising care and control over any dog which goes upon the land of another and causes injury, death or damage directly or indirectly to any livestock or poultry shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock or poultry for damages, death or injury caused by the dog. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog shall include consequential damages. 
(B)	Cumulative of other remedies. This section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to do away with or limit other causes of action which might inure to the owner of any livestock or poultry. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, see O.C.G.A. § 4-8-4. 
Sec. 92.25 - Animal bites; quarantine of animals. 
(A)	Definition. Animal bites are defined as: 
(1)	The breaking of the skin of a human being by an animal; and
(2)	For rabies control, a bite is also considered the exposure of animal saliva to scratches, abrasions, open wounds or mucous membranes of humans. 
(B)	Reporting procedure. All bite cases must be reported to the County Health Department. During non-business hours, the report shall be made to the Sheriff's Department. The bite report should be made as soon as possible, and in no case more than 16 hours after the bite. The responsibility rests with the owners and the person bitten to ensure that a complete report is made. Copies of bite reports shall be forwarded by the Health Department to the Animal Control Officer and the office of the Board of Commissioners. 
(C)	Quarantine required. 
(1)	Any dog or cat which has broken the skin of a human or is suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined for at least ten days. No such animal shall be released to the owner or humanely euthanized until the animal has been examined by a veterinarian or the officer/agent of Animal Control or Health Department at the expiration of the ten-day period and released from quarantine. 
(2)	The animal may be quarantined in a manner approved by the County Health Department.
(3)	The Animal Control Officer, in conjunction with the County Health Department, is authorized to require that the animal be quarantined at an Animal Shelter or in a veterinary clinic. In this instance, the owner is responsible for all board and veterinary medical costs incurred pursuant to the quarantine. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.26 - Authority to shoot/kill animals. 
(A)	Danger to officer/agent attempting capture. In the event any animal subject to being impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter cannot be captured without actual danger to the officer/agent attempting capture or the public, any officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department is authorized to shoot such an animal when shooting can be done without endangering persons or property. In such cases that may necessitate shooting an animal suspected of having rabies, the person shooting the animal shall avoid damage to the head of the animal so as not to interfere with laboratory examination of the brain to determine rabies infection. 
(B)	Animal suspected of being rabid. No person shall kill or cause to be killed any animal suspected of being rabid or any animal that has bitten a human, except as herein provided in division (A) of this section, nor shall any person remove such animals from Clay County, Georgia, without the sole permission of the County Health Department or authorized agent. 
(C)	Defense of person or property. In defense of person or property as authorized in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; no person shall harm, maim or kill any animal, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)	Defend his or her person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)	Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry.
(D)	Method of killing. The method used for killing the animal shall be as humane as possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstance indicated in this chapter shall incur no liability for such death under this chapter. 
(E)	Not to limit authority of agent. This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department, the Law Enforcement Department, Humane Society or veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.27 - Disposition of animals. 
(A)	Not under observation for rabies. Any impounded animal, not under observation for rabies, that is not claimed within seven days of the date of impoundment, shall be disposed of in a humane manner. 
(1)	An owned or adoptable animal, as determined by the Animal Control Officer, may be held for a longer period of time. 
(2)	Animals which pose a threat to the safety of the personnel responsible for the care of the animals and which are not under suspicion of rabies or quarantine may be disposed of in a humane manner. 
(B)	Under observation for rabies. Any animal suspected of having rabies shall remain in quarantine until its natural death, humanely destroyed for testing or until freedom from suspicion of rabies has been established to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer and the Health Department. 
(C)	Sick or injured animals. Any sick or injured animal may be euthanized at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. 
(D)	Dead animals. No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being left and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3 are fully complied with. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.28 - Livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any livestock, which includes but is not limited to, horses, mules, jacks, cattle, hogs, goats or sheep to run unattended. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99. 
Sec. 92.29 - Wild carnivores and other wild species. 
(A)	Game holding permit. Wild carnivores and other wild game species may not be kept in captivity on private premises without a game-holding permit issued by the Game and Fish Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(B)	Rabies vaccination. Wild carnivores kept in captivity with such a permit shall be vaccinated against rabies as often as required by Georgia Department of Human Resources to maintain immunity. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 92.40 - Definitions; exceptions. 
(A)	Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Dangerous dog. Any dog that, according to the records of the county: 
(a)	Has, without provocation, inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(b)	Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog or cat has been classified as potentially dangerous and the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Potentially dangerous dog. Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten persons without provocation; or any dog that, when unprovoked: 
(a)	Inflicts bites on a human being upon public or private property; or
(b)	Chases or approaches a human being upon the street, sidewalk or any public grounds in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack. 
Proper enclosure. An enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fenced or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog or cat from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog and shall, at all times, be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition, consistent with the needs of the dog involved. 
Severe injury. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Under control. Any animal that is under voice control or confined by fence, pen, cage, electronic device, chain, leash or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of its owner or is restrained by leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
(B)	Exceptions to definitions. The term dangerous dog and potentially dangerous dog shall not include the following: 
(1)	A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; 
(2)	A dog that inflicts an injury within the meaning of this division if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; 
(3)	A dog which has bitten or acted aggressively in defense, protection or in assistance to its master or other persons, unless such person was using the dog in conjunction with a criminal activity; 
(4)	Dogs that are part of a governmental or law enforcement operation or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties while confined to the property of the owner or other responsible person. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.41 - Reporting and investigation. 
The Animal Control Officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the county from an officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department or Law Enforcement Department shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous or reclassified as dangerous if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.42 - Classifying. 
Should the Animal Control Officer determine that a dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous, the officer shall classify such animal accordingly. The Animal Control Officer shall then notify the owner of such classification. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.43 - Notification requirements. 
(A)	Upon classification of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the Animal Control Officer shall attempt to notify the owner of such classification. 
(B)	The notice shall:
(1)	Be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last-known address;
(2)	Include a summary of the Animal Control Officer's findings that formed the basis for the classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	Be dated, and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the Animal Control Officer's determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous; 
(4)	State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the Clay County Board of Commissioners;
(5)	State that if a hearing is not requested, the Animal Control Officer's determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing as specified in this section; 
(6)	Include a form to request a hearing before the Board of Commissioners and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the Board. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.44 - Hearing scheduled; notice. 
When the Clay County Board of Commissioners receives a request for a hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after receiving the request. The Board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the Board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the Animal Control Officer's classification of the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.45 - Notification of determination. 
Within ten days after the hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.46 - Admissible as evidence. 
The classification of a dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous will be admissible as evidence in any subsequent civil or criminal proceedings. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.47 - Requirement for possessing a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(A)	Certificate of registration. No one shall have, own or possess within the county a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration. The Animal Control Officer shall issue a citation to purchase a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if the Animal Control Officer finds sufficient evidence of a proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(B)	Registration fee. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall present the citation to purchase a certificate of registration at the Clay County Board of Commissioners office within five days of receipt and pay an annual registration fee of $15.00 at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. Registration shall be renewed annually during the month of the initial registration. 
(C)	Insurance/surety bond. 
(1)	As authorized in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(c), in addition to the requirements of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence of a policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injury inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)	A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(D)	Distinctive collar. A dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be required to wear a distinctive fluorescent orange collar, which will be issued by the Animal Control Officer upon registration, with a numbered identification tag affixed. 
(E)	Posting of premises. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be required to post the premises where the animal is located with a clearly visible sign, issued by the Animal Control Office upon registration, containing a symbol designed to warn all citizens, including children, that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property. The number of signs required will be determined by the Animal Control Officer. 
(1)	The sign shall conform substantially to the design provided by the Department of Natural Resources. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(b)(2)(B). 
(2)	It shall be unlawful to display the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal sign where no such animal exists or is located. 
(F)	Moving out of the county. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the Animal Control Office if the owner is moving from the county. 
(G)	New state resident. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register such animal as required by this division within 30 days after becoming a resident of the state. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(e). 
(H)	New county resident. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and who moves to the county from any other county within the state shall register such animals as required by this division within ten days after becoming a resident of the county. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(e). 
(I)	Animals loose, unconfined, sold, donated, relocated. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the Animal Control Office and/or the Sheriff's office immediately, but in any case not to exceed 24 hours, if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human or domestic animal, has died or has been sold, donated or relocated. If the dog has been sold, donated or relocated, the former owner shall also provide the Animal Control Office with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(d). 
(J)	Restriction on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs outside of a proper enclosure as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under control of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99. 
Sec. 92.48 - Confiscation of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(A)	Confiscation of dangerous dog. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(a), a dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated if: 
(1)	The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by this division; 
(2)	The dog is not validly registered as required by this division;
(3)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(4)	The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this division.
(B)	Confiscation of potentially dangerous dog. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(b), a potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the animal is: 
(1)	Not validly registered as required by this division;
(2)	Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(3)	Outside a proper enclosure in violation of this division.
(C)	Compliance. Any dog confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this division and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provision of this division within 20 days of the date of confiscation, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(c). 
(D)	Violations. 
(1)	Dangerous dog violation; misdemeanor. The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this division or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this division, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed; and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(a). 
(2)	Dangerous dog attacks or bites a human being following previous violation; felony. If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this division knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this division, the owner shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this chapter. The owner of a dangerous dog who is convicted for a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years or both such fine and imprisonment. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(c). 
(3)	Dangerous dog attacks causing severe injury or death of a human being; felony. The owner of a dangerous dog who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this division. The owner of a dangerous dog who is convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than ten years or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(d). 
(4)	Confiscation. In addition to the penalties for violations under subsection (C) of this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by an officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department or Law Enforcement Department and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the County Health Department; thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(e). 
(5)	Potentially dangerous dog. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions under this division or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this division, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed; and for a third and subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(b). 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.49 - Liability for damages. 
(A)	Owner. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury or death of a person caused by such dog with the exception that no owner of said dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by the owner's dog in coming to the aid or defense of its owner; to any human being while on the owner property and who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog and was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(B)	County or employee. Under no circumstances shall Clay County or any employee or official of Clay County which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this Code be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being dangerous or potentially dangerous or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being dangerous or potentially dangerous or by a dog that the Animal Control Officer has failed to identify as dangerous or potentially dangerous but has not been kept or restrained in a manner described in this division or by a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this division. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 4-8-30. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 92.65 - Adoption of animals. 
(A)	Convey ownership. The Animal Control Officer may convey ownership (permit adoption of) any animal which has become the property of the Clay County Board of Commissioners to a responsible person subject to: 
(1)	Adoption fees. Any applicable adoption fee must be paid at the time of adoption. 
(2)	Rabies vaccination. Evidence satisfactory to the Animal Control Officer must be provided, within three working days, that the dog or cat has been examined by a veterinarian and vaccinated against rabies and other diseases. 
(B)	Neutering. Proof of compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia, which require that any adult dog or cat adopted from an Animal Shelter must be sterilized within 30 days after adoption or for an immature dog or cat, within 30 days of the sexual maturity (reached the age of 180 days or six months or more). 
(C)	Compliance. Failure to comply within the time frame of this section will result in a citation and/or the confiscation of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.66 - Impoundment. 
(A)	Animals subject to impoundment. Any animal within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded by the county: 
(1)	Stray animals whose ownership is unknown;
(2)	Dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs (as allowed in §§ 92.40 et seq.); 
(3)	Vicious animals of all kinds;
(4)	Female dogs in breeding season not confined to the premises of owners in such manner as to avoid nuisances and prevent access to other animals; 
(5)	Animals that have been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies;
(6)	Dogs not wearing valid rabies tags;
(7)	Animals suspected of not being treated in a humane manner.
(B)	No exemption. No dog or cat shall be exempted from provisions of this chapter on impoundment by virtue of having a vaccination tag. 
(C)	Notice of impoundment. Immediately upon impounding of animals, the officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department or Law Enforcement Department shall make a reasonable effort, which shall include but not be limited to the mailing of a notice by certified mail, to notify the owner of such animals so impounded and inform such owner of the conditions whereby custody of such animals may be regained. 
(D)	Duration of impoundment. Any animal impounded shall be in an Animal Shelter in a humane manner for a period of not less than seven days. If, after seven days, an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the animal shall become the absolute property of the Clay County Board of Commissioners, which may allow the animal to be adopted or humanely destroyed. 
(E)	Refuse to release. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the Animal Control Officer may refuse to release any animal impounded in the Animal Shelter for rabies or contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution for such time period as the agent/officer of Animal Control or the County Health Department may determine. 
(F)	Reclaiming impounded animals. 
(1)	The owner of an animal impounded in the Animal Shelter may reclaim the animal upon presenting evidence satisfactory to the Animal Control Officer of compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and upon payment of fees and charges as hereinafter provided, and which fees and charges shall not be in lieu of any fine or penalty otherwise provided by law. All applicable fees, including those for impoundment, board and any other fees for services rendered that may be charged by the Animal Control Officer shall be paid to the Board of Commissioners for all animals released to owners. 
(2)	All dogs or cats shall be inoculated against rabies within three working days of release.
(a)	Evidence of inoculation shall be provided to the Animal Control Officer verifying inoculation in said time frame, unless evidence is provided at time of release showing the dog or cat has current rabies vaccination. 
(b)	Failure to comply with this subsection will result in citation.
(G)	Impoundment, boarding and quarantine fees. 
(1)	Impoundment fee. In addition to other fees required by this chapter, there shall be an impoundment charge assessed against owners who recover their animals which were impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The fees for reclaiming impounded animals shall be as follows. 
(a)	First offense: $15.00;
(b)	Second offense: $25.00;
(c)	Third offense: $35.00;
(d)	Subsequent offense: $50.00. Note: Subsequent impoundments are levied against the animal owner and not necessarily for the same animal. 
(2)	Boarding fees. In addition to other fees required by this chapter, there shall be a boarding fee of $10.00 per day. 
(3)	Quarantine fee. The fee for animals impounded for rabies quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution shall be at the rate of $15.00 per day. 
(4)	Fee changes. All fees shall be set by the Board of Commissioners and may be changed by the Board of Commissioners at any meeting. 
(5)	Owner. The owner of an animal impounded in the Animal Shelter shall be liable for the foregoing fees and charges. 
(H)	Escape, injury or pilfering. The Animal Control Officer shall exercise care to prevent the injury, escape or pilfering of any animals with which he or she deals in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, but he or she shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.67 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the primary responsibility of the Animal Control Officer, with assistance as required from the County Health Department and/or members of the Law Enforcement Department, to see that provisions of this chapter are enforced. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.68 - Summons and evidence. 
The agents/officers of Animal Control, the County Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department are authorized to issue a citation to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter with the exception of incidents pertaining to dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs (see §§ 92.40 through 92.49). The investigating officer shall secure all evidence to provide the court with all essential and available facts upon trial of offenses under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.69 - Burden of proof. 
The burden of proof generally lies with the person filing the complaint(s) to the extent that proof of such fact is essential. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.70 - Interference. 
No person shall resist, interfere with, hinder or molest any officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department in the performance of duties imposed upon them in this chapter, nor shall any person seek to release or remove any animal captured or impounded pursuant to provisions of this chapter from custody except as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.71 - Probable cause. 
(A)	Prior to going onto private property, an officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department or Law Enforcement Department charged with enforcement of any provision of this chapter must have knowledge of facts or circumstances that would make a prudent or reasonable person believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring. 
(B)	The authority vested in the officer/agent of Animal Control, the County Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department shall: 
(1)	Not be construed to provide the officer/agent with the authority to enter a private building or house for any reason, unless permission is given by said owner of said property; and 
(2)	Under no circumstances include the right of said officer/agent to infringe on the rights and liberties of any citizen. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.72 - Bribery. 
It shall be unlawful to attempt to bribe, coerce or otherwise influence an officer/agent of Animal Control, the Health Department and/or Law Enforcement Department investigating an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99. 
Sec. 92.73 - Complaints against animal control procedures or personnel. 
Any complaints about animal control procedures or personnel should be brought to the attention of the County Administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 92.99 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, with the exception of incidents pertaining to dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs (§§ 92.40 through 92.49), shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $1,000.00, or public service work not to exceed 150 hours, or both. If such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2001)
Chapter 93 - GRAY WATER REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Hand Watering Gray Water Regulation, Clay County Board of Health
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. §§ 31-5-1, 31-5-8, 31-5-9

Sec. 93.01 - Authority, scope and applicability. 
(A)	This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2, as amended. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this chapter. The Board of Commissioners of Clay County specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 31-5-5.2 may exist within Clay County. 
(B)	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within Clay County whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. 
(Ord. No. 09-014, 9-1-2009)
Sec. 93.02 - Definitions. 
(A)	As used in this Code section, the term "gray water" means wastewater discharged from residential lavatories, bathtubs, showers, clothes washers and laundry trays. 
(B)	"Floodway or regulatory floodway" means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which are necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
(Ord. No. 09-014, 9-1-2009)
Sec. 93.03 - Procedures and requirements. 
Private residential direct reuse of gray water shall be lawful if the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Gray water originating from the residence shall be used and contained within the property boundary for household gardening, composting, lawn watering or landscape irrigation; 
(2)	Gray water shall not be used for irrigation of food plants;
(3)	The gray water shall not contain hazardous chemicals derived from activities such as cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or disposing of waste solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist or home occupational activities; 
(4)	The application of gray water shall be managed to minimize standing water on the surface;
(5)	The application of gray water shall be outside of a floodway;
(6)	The gray water shall not contain water used to wash diapers or similarly soiled or infectious garments unless the gray water is disinfected before irrigation; and 
(7)	The gray water shall be applied only by hand watering, using garden watering cans or similar handheld containers. 
(Ord. No. 09-014, 9-1-2009)
Sec. 93.04 - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-014, 9-1-2009)
Chapter 94 - OUTDOOR WATER USE 

Sec. 94.01. - Restriction. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(A)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(B)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(C)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(D)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(E)	Watering personal food gardens;
(F)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(G)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(H)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(I)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(J)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(K)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(L)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(M)	Hydroseeding.
(Res. No. 10-087, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 94.02. - Enforcement. 
(A)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in the ordinance. 
(B)	The county manager shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(C)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(D)	A violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Res. No. 10-087, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 94.03. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Clay County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 10-087, § 1, 12-7-2010)
TITLE XI - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Chapter 110 - GENERAL LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110.01 - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(A)	Levied. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within Clay County at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(B)	Minimum Business License Tax.The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to Section 1 of this resolution shall be $1,000.00. 
(C)	Filing of Return. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the Board of Commissioners of Clay County on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The Board of Commissioners of Clay County shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this resolution base upon the information provided in said return. 
(D)	Due Date of Taxes. Taxes levied pursuant to this resolution shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by Subsection (C) of this section unless extended by the Board of Commissioners. 
(E)	Administrative Provisions. The Clerk of Clay County is hereby directed to forward a copy of this resolution to each depository financial institution in Clay County and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Res. of 8-1983; Res. of 11-8-1983, §§ 1—5)
Sec. 110.02 - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
(A)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of Clay County, in an amount equal to 2.5% of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(B)	The Clerk of the county is directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the Insurance Commissioner within ten days of its enactment. 
(Res. of 8-1983)
Sec. 110.03 - Statement on each license. 
A statement will be on each license issued that shall read, "A Copy of Laws, Rules, Regulations and Resolutions will be presented to licensee at time of issuing of license." 
(Res. of 11-7-1978)
Chapter 111 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 111.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages. All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21% alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family. Any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this section within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the law of this state. 
Fortified wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21% alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
License. The authorization by the governing authority of Clay County to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises for a calendar year or the remaining portion of a calendar year. 
Licensee. A person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under terms of this chapter. 
Liquor. Distilled spirits. 
Malt beverage. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term malt beverage does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer. A producer or bottler of beer or wine. 
Person. An individual or individuals, a partnership or partnerships, a corporation and an association or associations. 
Premises. That area circumscribed by the property lines of the property upon which a licensee is authorized to operate. 
Retail sale. Selling or offering for sale of alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
Wholesaler. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverage as defined herein. 
Wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21% alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.02 - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the county; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use; to preserve residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given to the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in roads and streets and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; and to prevent an undesirable person from engaging in or having an interest in alcoholic beverage or the sale thereof in the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.03 - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverage as defined in § 111.01 within the unincorporated area of Clay County without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter, but the properly licensed sale of beer and wine is declared lawful. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 111.04 - Intoxicating liquor; sale, transportation or possession of non-tax-paid beverages prohibited. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell any non-tax-paid intoxicating liquors or beverage within the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(B)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to transport any non-tax-paid intoxicating liquors or beverage within the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(C)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to possess any non-tax-paid intoxicating liquors or beverage within the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(D)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell any distilled spirits, fortified wine or liquors as defined in § 111.01 in the unincorporated area of Clay County. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local governing authorities with respect to licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.

Sec. 111.15 - Required; consideration and approval; subsequent issuance; conditional approval. 
(A)	No alcoholic beverage shall be manufactured or warehoused except under license granted by the Clay County Board of Commissioners as provided in this subchapter, but the properly licensed sale of such alcoholic beverages is declared lawful. 
(B)	Each application provided for in this chapter shall be considered and passed upon by the Clay County Board of Commissioners in regular or special session, legally assembled. No license shall be granted to any person unless it is made to appear to the Clay County Board of Commissioners that the applicant is a suitable and fit person to carry on such business, and that the business will be conducted in an orderly manner and in compliance with all laws, municipal, state and federal. Upon approval of the application and payment of the required license fee, the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of the license; provided, however, the Board of Commissioners reserves the right to approve such issuance of the license conditioned upon full and final compliance by the licensee with all applicable county ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.16 - Disqualification provisions. 
When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no original application shall be considered and no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued by the Board of Commissioners to or for: 
(A)	Any person as determined by the Board of Commissioners by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he or she has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he or she is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations; 
(B)	Any person who shall have been convicted or who shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond, to any felony within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, or not more than two misdemeanors with no drug convictions within a period of five years immediately proper to the filing of any such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance except a traffic violation, particularly, but not limited to, those involving force or violence, prostitution, alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction, plea or forfeiture tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he or she is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, of a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. 
(C)	A location not suitable in the judgment of the Board of Commissioners because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
(D)	A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the Board of Commissioners, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(E)	Any person who is an elected official of or employee of Clay County.
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.17 - Application forms; license not to issue under certain conditions. 
(A)	All applications for licenses shall be made on forms furnished the applicant by the Clay County Clerk and shall indicate, along with all reasonable information necessary to complete the form, which of the following is to be considered for licensing of the applicant to conduct: 
(1)	Retail beer;
(2)	Retail wine.
(B)	Upon approval by the Board of Commissioners of an original or renewal application for license of one or more of the above types of sales of alcoholic beverages, such sales of alcoholic beverages may be made by the applicant after a license is issued for all or the remaining part of the calendar year in which the licensee is issued unless the license is revoked or suspended for due cause as provided in § 111.20. All applications for renewal of licenses to sell alcoholic beverages shall be filed with the County Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on December 31 of the year preceding the year for which the application renewal is made. The annual fee for the license sought to be renewed shall be paid to the county at the time the application for renewal is filed. Failure of any holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages to file the application for renewal by the date and time specified shall render the license void, effective the last legal hour on December 31 of that year for such sales. In order to sell alcoholic beverages, a license holder who has allowed the license to lapse shall file a new application for license as if a license had never been held and pursuant to the provision of this subchapter. Where an application for renewal is timely filed as provided in this subchapter, the license holder shall be permitted to continue selling alcoholic beverages under the previous year's license until the Board of Commissioners has acted upon the license holder's application for renewal. Wholesale sales of alcoholic beverages in the county by wholesalers licensed by the state are declared legal, subject to the right of the county to charge a wholesaler for violation of state law or regulation and to request a hearing thereon before the State Revenue Commissioner. 
(C)	The County Clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the county. No license shall be issued nor shall a license be renewed until all such debts are paid in full. 
(D)	All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the Sheriff's Department and the report of investigation presented to the Board of Commissioners for consideration with the application. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.18 - Fees. 
(A)	The following annual fees shall be paid to the Clay County Board of Commissioners before any license to sell alcoholic beverage is issued. 
(1)	Retail beer: $250.00;
(2)	Retail wine: $250.00;
(3)	Beer wholesaler (licensed by the state): $100.00.
(B)	Upon filing an original application or reapplication (except renewals) with the County Clerk, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by a check a processing fee of $40.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing the application, which fee shall not be refundable and shall not apply against any license granted hereunder. There will be no investigation fee charged wholesalers licensed by the state. 
(C)	There will be no proration of license fees when licenses are obtained during the license year. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.19 - Advertisement of application for license to engage in business; signs posted. 
(A)	All applicants for an original retail license hereunder shall give notice of the making of an application by advertisement at least once a week, for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of hearing on such application, in the weekly newspaper in which the legal advertisements of the county are published, which notice shall contain the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the name of all of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and the names of all officers of any corporation owning an interest in the applicant corporation, and the date and time the Board of Commissioners will hear such application. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, two-column advertisement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for an original license to advertise the notice as required as follows: 
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. 
The undersigned has made application to the Clay County Board of Commissioners for a retail license to sell beer/wine. This application will be heard by the Board of Commissioners at its meeting to be held at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the day of ____________/____________/____________, 20____________. 
/s/____________ 
Applicant 
(B)	The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business for at least seven days before the date of hearing a sign or signs stating the following: 
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR ____________ 
HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF CLAY COUNTY ON THE DAY OF ____________/____________/____________, 20____________. 
(C)	The sign or signs required by subsection (B) of this section shall be not less than 24 inches by 36 inches and shall face toward all public roads adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.20 - Suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or transfer. 
(A)	Notice, hearing. Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the county to any licensee may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Clay County Board of Commissioners for due cause. Before the Board of Commissioners shall deny any application for a license or shall revoke or suspend any existing license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing from the County Clerk to show cause before the Board of Commissioners at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than ten days from the date of service of the notice, why the application for, or renewal of, a license should not be denied, or why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefore, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why the applicant should not be denied or the license revoked or suspended, after which the Board of Commissioners shall take such action as it, in its judgment, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. All decisions denying, suspending or revoking any license or application shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence, have an attorney and have testimony recorded at his or her expense. 
(B)	Due cause generally. 
(1)	Due cause for the suspension, revocation or denial of any license shall consist of an act or omission found to be by the Board of Commissioner, after a hearing as above provided, a violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business or for the violation of any state or federal law, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on or inside the premises or for the violation any county ordinances, other than traffic violations or ordinances. 
(2)	Due cause shall also consist of the business or the operation or location thereof or the owner or any person connected therewith ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of license as stated in this chapter. 
(3)	Due cause may also be found upon the revelation of any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder. Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original or renewal application for license hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. 
(4)	Failure to control operation resulting in public nuisance. If the failure to control the operation either inside the building or outside on the property results in controlled substance abuse, prostitution, gambling, flagrant indecent conduct or obscenity, fighting, excessive noise, loitering or illegal parking, to the number of times and extent that the Board of Commissioners, after proper hearing, should find the establishment to have become a public nuisance, then such failure may be declared to be due cause for suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license for such establishment or the denial of renewal application for same. 
(C)	Emergency due cause; failure or refusal to cooperate with peace officers acting in line of duty. On evidence of failure or refusal of the licensee or employee hereunder to cooperate with any peace officer or on any reasonable request or action within such officer's duties, responsibilities or powers, including all legal powers, rights and duties to investigate to determine any pertinent fact relating to the establishment, the licensee, any employees or corporate officers or partners, the Sheriff shall immediately order all sales of any alcoholic beverages suspended until after a hearing as set out in the due cause hearing provided for in subsection (A) of this section, such hearing to be concerning such failure or refusal to cooperate. 
(D)	Terms of suspension for first offense. Upon presentation of reasonable evidence to show cause for revoking or suspending of a license, the Board of Commissioners shall revoke or suspend said license for such period of time as provided herein for the first offense: 
(1)	Breach of peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on or in the premises or for the violation of any state or federal law, flagrant indecent conduct or obscenity, excessive noise, loitering or illegal parking, prostitution, gambling or failure or refusal to cooperate with peace officers acting in the line of duty: 30 days; 
(2)	Sale of alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or Sunday: 60 days. 
(3)	Sale of alcoholic beverage to persons under 21 years of age: 90 days.
(E)	Terms of suspension for second offense. The revocation or suspension shall be twice the term of the first offence if revoked or suspended for a second violation. Upon a second violation, the licensee shall install or cause to be installed a video monitoring and recording system of the type and number approved by the Sheriff. 
(1)	Such video monitoring and recording systems shall be capable of recording time, and the recording medium used shall be of a quality capable of being reproduced onto a still frame. 
(2)	Such video camera shall be placed in a conspicuous location in a position to video record all activity in all sales transaction areas. 
(3)	Each such licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance and periodic check of the licensee's monitoring and recording system. 
(4)	Each such licensee shall reinstate the licensee's system within 72 hours of any system failure. 
(F)	No refund of license fee. When a license is so revoked or suspended, the county shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee. 
(G)	Effect of revocation by state. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail, the county license to deal in such thereupon shall be automatically revoked without any action by the Board of Commissioners or any law enforcement officer. If the state has suspended the license or placed the same on probation, then the county license is automatically suspended or probated, as the case may be. 
(H)	Emergency situation. The Chairperson of the Clay County Board of Commissioners is the delegated authority to suspend any license hereunder in any emergency situation, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the Board of Commissioners. In addition, in any emergency situation, the Sheriff is authorized to cause the business in question to close temporarily until he or she decides the emergency or possible riotous situation to be at an end, or until such decision is made by the Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.21 - Transfer, changes of ownership, locations. 
(A)	Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(B)	In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners and subject to the terms of this section, the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heir(s) at law of the deceased person, if such administrator, executor, personal representative or heir(s) meet all of the other qualifications contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his or her estate and disposition of the license or his or her interest therein, but in no event to exceed six months. 
(C)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license from withdrawing from the partnership and assigning his or her interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this section are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the Board of Commissioners. 
(D)	Any change in the ownership interests contained on the application shall cause the immediate cessation of sales of any alcoholic beverage, and no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made until any such change or changes in the ownership interests are approved by the Board of Commissioners; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation where one or more individuals who have ownership interests in the license cease to a have such ownership interest, but the remaining ownership interest remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests. 
(E)	An application for a new license on an existing licensed location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.22 - Conducting a public hearing on original application. 
(A)	No original application for a license hereunder shall be acted upon or issued by the Board of Commissioners until after advertisement and public hearing thereon, as required in § 111.19. 
(B)	A date for a public hearing upon which all original and completed applications for a license hereunder shall be scheduled by the Board of Commissioners and called before a regular meeting not more than 90 days after the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000; Res. No. 12-008, §§ 1, 2, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 111.23 - Citizenship, residence requirement. 
(A)	No license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any applicant who has not resided continuously within the State of Georgia for a period of 12 months next preceding the date on which the application is made, except that the wholesalers are exempt from this residency provision. All licensees that sell alcoholic beverages must remain a resident of the State of Georgia during the tenure of their license. 
(B)	All applicants, including partners and stockholders having an interest in an applying corporation, or in any corporation having an interest in the applicant corporation, shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the application requested of them by the Sheriff of Clay County, which shall include fingerprints, except in the case of any corporate stockholders when an officer of the corporation making the application shall be fingerprinted and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. All applicants shall submit an executed version, as modified by the Sheriff, of the personnel statement Form ATT-17, State of Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol Tax and Control Unit. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.24 - Fingerprinting of beer and wine license applicants and certain employees; fees. 
(A)	Each applicant for a license to sell beer or wine who has not heretofore been licensed by Clay County to sell beer or wine at retail shall be required to submit to a complete fingerprinting record and test, pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the county from time to time, the same being used by the county to supplement the information contained on the application and to make available to the county any records of criminal offenses, either federal or state, from other jurisdictions. Each new applicant (not renewals) shall pay a $40.00 investigation fee. 
(B)	It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the Sheriff the names of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone number and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with names of new employees, must be filed with the Sheriff within seven days from the date of any such changes. 
(C)	The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his or her employees while in his or her employment. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 111.35 - Hours; daily, Sundays. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed to sell beer or wine hereunder to permit the sale or engage in the sale of such beer or wine from 2:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. All customers must vacate the premises no later than 2:30 a.m. 
(B)	Hotels, motels, grocery stores, service stations and restaurants shall not be required to close unrelated functions and activities not licensed under this chapter or customarily operated at hours other than the foregoing specified hours, but all alcoholic beverages of any nature must be and remain in the custody and control of the licensee or his or her employees and may not be dispensed in any manner, and the licensee is required to evict any other person possessing any of the above. 
(C)	It shall be unlawful to permit the sale or engage in the sale of or permit on-premises consumption of beer or wine on Sunday from 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 111.36 - People under legal age. 
(A)	Furnishing. It shall be unlawful and punishable for any person holding an alcoholic beverage license, or any other person, or his or her agent or employee, to sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift of any alcoholic beverage to any person under legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in the home with parental consent. No person shall be convicted under this section if such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person who is being furnished alcoholic beverages is of legal age or over. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, with the person's photograph, and giving the person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or Georgia identification card. The licensee shall cause all persons who appear to be near the legal age to exhibit and the licensee or his or her employee shall inspect one of the means of identification allowed above. 
(B)	Consumption, possession. It shall be unlawful and punishable for any person under legal age to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage except for medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state or in the home with parental consent. 
(C)	Attempting to purchase or possess alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attempt to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(D)	Use of faked and the like credentials. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which they are not entitled. 
(E)	Underage persons on licensed premises. No person who holds an alcoholic beverage license, or his or her agent or employee, shall allow any person who has not attained the age of 21 years to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or unless such person is an employee of the license holder; provided, however, that such person shall be permitted in restaurants or other places serving meals without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(F)	Employment of persons under 21 years of age. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)	Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment (see subsection (G) of this section); 
(2)	Taking orders for, and having possession of, alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment (see subsection (G) of this section). 
(G)	Persons under 18 years of age not to be allowed or required to serve, sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. No person shall allow or require a person in his or her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 111.37 - Adequate parking. 
Adequate parking shall mean one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area within the building of the applicant, but not less than a minimum of six spaces. All off-street parking must be on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.38 - Use of persons with prior convictions; prohibited. 
No licensee shall work in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity found to have been convicted of, or who shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere to, any felony within a period of ten years immediately prior to employment, to not more than two misdemeanors with no drug convictions within a five years immediately prior to employment, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, of the United States or any municipal ordinance except a traffic violation. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Board of Commissioners in its sole discretion may direct the issuance of a letter of eligibility to persons who have in the past been convicted of, or plead guilty to, or forfeited a bond on any crime not involving force or violence, and the Board of Commissioners after a thorough investigation of all the facts, including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant have determined that such action is in keeping with the public good and ends of justice or the public interest and welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.39 - Prohibited consumption on-premises. 
No licensee hereunder shall permit consumption of alcoholic beverages except inside portions of the building legal for such consumption. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.40 - Premises to be well-lighted. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall have sufficient lighting so that all entrances and parking areas are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.41 - Fire and safety; maximum occupancy provisions. 
All drinking establishments licensed or to be considered for licensing for consumption on the premises of any alcoholic beverages shall be measured as to the net usable floor area and publicly visible posters stating the maximum number of persons allowable inside the building where such beverages are consumed shall be posted by the Fire Chief or Sheriff. The minimal allowable floor space per occupancy in the net usable floor area shall be 12 square feet. The alcoholic beverage licensee will be responsible for seeing that the established occupancy limits are not exceeded, and the violation of this provision shall be due cause for suspension or revocation by the Board of Commissioners after proper hearing of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.42 - Levy of excise tax. 
(A)	In addition to the annual retail malt beverage license and retail wine license fees herein provided, there is levied an excise tax upon all malt beverages sold, displayed or stored in any unincorporated area of Clay County, Georgia, in the following amounts: 

 
Upon all wine there is levied an excise tax of $.20 per liter. 
(B)	The taxes herein levied shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the governing authority by the wholesale distributor on all malt beverages and on all wines, respectively, sold to retailers in the unincorporated areas of Clay County, Georgia, as follows: each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages or wines to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of the delivery and shall remit the same, together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale distributor to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any malt beverage or any wine without having first collected said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any malt beverages or wine on which said tax has not been paid. 
(C)	Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the governing authority a summary of all purchase invoices for malt beverages and wine sold to each retailer in the unincorporated areas of Clay County, Georgia, on or before the tenth day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(D)	Each retailer will maintain a copy of each invoice showing the amount of excise tax paid. Said invoices will be maintained at the place of business and available for inspection for two years. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 111.43 - Regulations and restrictions. 
(A)	The sale of malt beverages and wines under this chapter is declared to be a privilege and not a right and all licenses that may be issued hereunder shall be issued subject to this understanding. 
(B)	No retail malt beverage or retail wine license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or to any other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his or her license to the governing authority. 
(C)	All holders of a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine shall keep a copy of this chapter in his or her premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee or his or her agent selling malt beverages or wines shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his or her employees in any violation of this chapter or of the laws of the State of Georgia or the rules and regulation of the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(D)	The business premises of the holder of a retail malt beverage and wine license for the sale of malt beverages and wines shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(E)	The Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia, reserves the right to amend, alter and add to these regulations from time to time as they may deem necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety, welfare and morals, and all licenses issued hereunder are issued subject to this understanding. 
(F)	All resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict herewith be and are expressly repealed. 
(G)	Should any section or part of this chapter be held by the courts to be unconstitutional, contrary to law or void, such decision shall not affect the remaining sections or parts of this chapter, and it shall be construed to have been the intent to enact this chapter without such invalid part therein, and the remainder of this chapter, after the exclusion of such part, shall be deemed to be valid or if such part had not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Chapter 112 - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 112.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Agency. The person, department or agency designated by the Clay County Board of Commissioners to act in administrative matters relating to cable television. 
Auxiliary services. Any communications service in addition to regular subscriber services, including, but not limited to pay TV, burglar alarm service, data transmission, facsimile service, home shopping service and the like. 
Cable television system or catv system. Any facility that in whole or in part receives directly, or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such service. 
Channel. A band of frequencies six megahertz wide in the electro-magnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audio visual television signal and a few non-video signals or a large number of non-video signals or a large number of non-video signals. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
Franchise. An authorization granted by the franchise authority which permits the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable television system within the Franchise Area under the terms of this chapter. 
Franchise area. That portion of the franchise entity for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. The Franchise Area may or may not be conterminous with the franchise entity. 
Franchise authority. The governing body of the franchise entity. 
Franchise entity. The unincorporated area of Clay County, Georgia, as presently constituted and including any area henceforth added thereto during the terms of any franchise granted hereunder. 
Grantee. The holder of a cable television franchise issued by the franchise authority. 
Gross revenues. Revenues derived directly or indirectly by the grantee from both regular subscriber service and auxiliary services. 
Gross subscriber revenues. Those revenues derived directly or indirectly by a grantee from the supplying of regular subscriber service; that is, the installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees and fees for regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels if utilized. It does not include revenues derived from auxiliary services or from any taxes, whether or not passed on to users, per program or per channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues or any other income derived from the system. 
Major stockholder. A beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of 30% or more of the issued and outstanding voting stock of any corporation. 
Persons. Any people, firms, corporations, associations or other legally recognized entities. 
Public street. The surface of and the space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way, public utility easement and any other public ground or water within or belonging to the franchise entity. 
Regular subscriber service. That service regularly provided to all subscribers. It includes all broadcast signals, carriages and FCC-required access channel carriages, including origination programming. It does not include specialized programming for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made. 
Subscriber. Any person receiving regular subscriber service. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.02 - Franchise to operate required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable television system without a franchise issued under this chapter. The franchise authority may, by resolution, award a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or any portion of the franchise entity to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes application for authority to furnish a cable television system which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter; provided, that this section shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the franchise authority from restricting the number of grantees should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 112.03 - Term of franchise. 
(A)	Any franchise granted by the franchise authority shall be for a term not to exceed 20 years following the date such franchise is accepted by the grantee, and upon application of the grantee and review of the performance of the grantee in a public proceeding, the franchise authority may renew the franchise for successive periods, not to exceed 20 years, with such modification of terms as the franchise authority may determine in each instance. 
(B)	The franchise authority may terminate any franchise in the event grantee shall refuse or neglect to comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this chapter. 
(C)	Should the franchise authority determine that grantee is not, in its opinion, in compliance with this chapter and any franchise issued there under, it shall so notify grantee, and grantee shall, within 30 days, bring the franchised system into compliance, reporting correction action taken to the franchise authority. 
(D)	If the franchise authority is not satisfied that compliance has been achieved, or that good faith progress is being made toward compliance, it may schedule a public hearing to determine whether the franchise should be revoked. The grantee and the public shall be given at least 30 days notice of such a hearing, and all interested parties shall be heard in open hearing. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the franchise authority shall determine whether the franchise should be terminated and shall set forth, in writing, the facts and reasons upon which its decision is based. This division shall not be construed to be the sole and exclusive remedy of the franchise authority in the event of noncompliance by the grantee. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.04 - Limitations of franchise. 
(A)	Unless an exclusive franchise shall be expressly granted, any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the franchise authority from granting identical or similar franchises to more than one person, within all or any portion of the franchise entity. 
(B)	A grantee shall, at all times during the life of its franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the franchise entity's police power and such reasonable regulations as the franchise authority may subsequently promulgate there under. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit in any way the right of franchise entity to levy non-discriminatory occupational license taxes on any activity conducted by grantee. 
(C)	All privileges prescribed in such a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public street, and the franchise authority reserves the right to reasonably designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed within the public ways. 
(D)	(1)	A franchise shall be a privilege which is personal to the original grantee. It shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either, by sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the franchise authority expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, which shall include an acceptance of all terms and conditions of the franchise by transfer, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed with the Agency within 30 days after such transfer or assignment. 
(2)	Consent of the franchise authority shall not be granted until it has examined the proposed assignee's legal, financial, technical, character and other qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the franchise entity and has afforded all interested parties notice and an opportunity to be heard on the question. 
(E)	Consent of the franchise authority shall not be arbitrarily refused, provided that the proposed assignee possesses the requisite qualifications and agrees, in writing, to comply with all provisions of the franchise and this chapter. 
(F)	Transfer of 30% or more of the voting securities of corporate grantee to a person not presently a stockholder shall be deemed to be a transfer of control. 
(G)	No such consent shall be required for transfers:
(1)	In trust, of system assets by mortgage or by other hypothecation, to secure an indebtedness;
(2)	To a parent subsidiary of a corporate grantee;
(3)	To a corporation whose stock is held by the same stockholders as grantee;
(4)	Of less than 30% of the voting securities of a corporate grantee unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control; 
(5)	Of stock from one present stockholder to another present stockholder unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control. 
(H)	Nothing herein shall be deemed to in any way impair or affect the right of the franchise entity to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a price reflective of its fair market value as an ongoing concern, and nothing herein shall be construed to constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the franchise entity. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.05 - Liability and indemnification. 
(A)	A grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a franchise, specifically agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties which the franchise entity may be legally required to pay as a result of grantee's installation, operation or maintenance of a franchise cable television system under this chapter, whether or not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise entity. 
(B)	A grantee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the franchise entity in defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (A) above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the franchise entity. 
(C)	The grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the franchise entity and the grantee with regard to all damages mentioned in subsection (A) above, caused by grantee or its agent in the minimum of: 
(1)	Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia;
(2)	Five-hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit, however, of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury of death resulting from any one accident; 
(3)	Two-hundred and fifty thousand dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident. The insurance policies obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section shall be issued by a company or companies acceptable to the franchise entity, and a current certificate or certificates of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the Agency during the term of the franchise. The policies shall name the franchise entity as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the franchise entity 30 days in advance of the effective date hereof. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.06 - Amendment of franchise. 
The franchise authority may amend this chapter, and any franchise issued hereunder, upon its own motion or the application of a grantee whenever amendment is necessary to enable a grantee to utilize new developments in television or radio signal transmission which would improve and update cable television service in the Franchise Area, to comply with any modifications in the rules of the FCC. No amendment shall be adopted except after full, open public hearing affording due process and no amendment substantially amending the existing rights and obligations of the grantee shall be adopted without grantee's consent. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.07 - Application procedures. 
(A)	This chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable television system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of a separate ordinance awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)	Any person interested in obtaining a franchise to operate a cable television system in the Franchise Area shall submit a written application to the franchise authority, together with a non-refundable application fee of $100.00, which shall contain the following information. 
(1)	The name, address and form of business of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the names, addresses and occupations of its officers, directors and major stockholders, and the names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies. If applicant is a corporation controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses and occupations of the officers, directors and major stockholders of the controlling corporation shall also be stated. If the applicant is a partnership or other unincorporated association, the name and address of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set forth, and if one or more parties are corporations, the names, addresses and occupations of such corporation's officers, directors and major stockholders shall also be stated. 
(2)	A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the applicant (or any partner or major stockholder of applicant) has a substantial interest, stating the location, approximate number of homes served and the name and address of the local franchising body. 
(3)	A thorough description of the proposed cable television system to be installed and operated; the manner in which the applicant proposes to contract, install, maintain and operate the same; and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of public utility companies will be used in the proposed system, together with a map or maps delineating proposed service areas if the applicant proposes to serve less than the entire franchise entity. 
(4)	A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of subscribers for both installation and monthly service and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the applicant and its proposed subscribers. 
(5)	A copy of any contract which may exist between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of such utility's property, such as poles, lines or conduits. 
(6)	A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, between the applicant and any other person with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed cable television operation. If a franchise should be granted to a person posing as a front or representative of another undisclosed person, such franchise shall be deemed void ab initio and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(7)	An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed system and a financial statement prepared in form satisfactory to the Franchising Authority showing applicant's financial status and it financial ability to meet these proposed costs. 
(8)	A sworn statement acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this chapter and the rules of the FCC and its intention to abide by the same. 
(9)	Any such supplementary information as the franchise authority shall at any time demand in order to reasonably determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.08 - Renewal procedures. 
(A)	A franchise may be renewed by the franchise authority for a period of up to 20 years upon the written request of the grantee without soliciting additional applications. Such a renewal request shall be filed at least six but not more than 18 months prior to the expiration of the franchise and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $100.00. A renewal request may propose modifications in the terms of a grantee's franchise which shall be considered by the franchise authority, but in any case, the franchise authority may, upon its own motion, modify the terms of a grantee's franchise subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (B) below. 
(B)	Upon receipt of a request for a renewal of a franchise, the franchise authority shall then render a decision to renew or not to renew the grantee's franchise, and if the former course is taken whether or not its franchise should be modified in any way. A grantee shall file its acceptance of a renewal franchise within 30 days after it is offered by the franchise authority and upon failure to do so shall be conclusively presumed to have consented to the expiration of its franchise. 
(C)	In the event of a non-renewal or termination of a franchise, the franchise entity shall have the option to purchase, or to require any successor grantee to purchase, grantee's facilities at a cost not to exceed its then fair market value with a reduction for uncompensated damages incurred by the franchise entity in connection with the grantee's operation. If such fair market value cannot be agreed upon by the parties, it shall be determined by a three-member Arbitration Panel, one member to be selected by the franchise authority, one by the franchise and the third member by the two members first named. The parties shall divide the expenses of arbitration evenly among themselves. 
(D)	Existing franchises issued prior to the adoption of this chapter and renegotiated to comply with this chapter shall be treated as franchise renewals insofar as procedural matters are concerned. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.09 - Continued use of individual antennas protected. 
It is not the franchise authority's intention to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to receive cable television service or connect with a cable television system. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.10 - Grantee may promulgate rules. 
A grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this chapter and the rules of the FCC and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers. The rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.11 - Delegation of powers. 
Any delegable right, power or duty of the franchise authority, the franchise entity, the Agency or any official of the franchise entity may be transferred or delegated by resolution to an appropriate officer, employee or department of the franchise entity. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.12 - Notices. 
Every direction, notice or order to be served upon a grantee shall be sent to the local office described in § 112.27. Every notice to be served upon the franchise entity shall be delivered, or sent by certified mail to the Agency at: Clay County Board of Commissioners, 105 Washington Street, Fort. Gaines, Georgia 39851. The delivery of such notice shall be deemed to have been at the time of receipt. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.13 - Rights and remedies cumulative. 
The rights and remedies reserved to the parties by this chapter are cumulative and shall not add or subtract from any other rights or remedies which they may have with respect to the subject matter of this chapter, and a waiver thereof at any time shall not affect any other time. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.14 - Right of franchise entity to intervene. 
The franchise entity reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 112.25 - Technical requirements; channel capacity. 
The CATV system to be constructed by grantee shall be installed, maintained and operated at all times in full compliance with the technical and channel capacity standards of the Federal Communications Commission. The results of annual performance tests conducted in accordance with FCC rules shall be retained for at least five years and available for inspection by the franchise entity. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.26 - Safety requirements. 
A grantee shall at all times: 
(A)	Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the franchise entity's Building Code and other applicable ordinances, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the franchise entity; 
(B)	Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the franchise entity, wherever situated or located. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.27 - Service standards; business office; resolution of complaints. 
Throughout the life of its franchise, a grantee shall: 
(A)	Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for all of its facilities; 
(B)	Maintain a conveniently-located business office and service center to which subscribers may telephone without incurring added message units or toll charges. This office shall be open during all usual business hours; 
(C)	Dispatch personnel to investigate all service complaints and equipment malfunctions within 24 hours and strive to resolve such complaints as promptly as possible. Planned interruption of service shall be only for good cause. Insofar as possible, planned service interruptions shall be preceded by notice, be of brief duration and occur during minimum viewing hours; 
(D)	Maintain a complete list of all complaints received and the measures taken to resolve them. This list shall be available to the Agency upon request; 
(E)	Permit the Agency to inspect and test the system's technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable (12 to 24-hours') notice; 
(F)	Responsibility for the administration of any franchise granted hereunder and for the resolution of all complaints against a grantee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters is delegated to the Agency which is empowered, among other things, to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the grantee, either on behalf of the franchise entity, the grantee or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interest of the public; provided that any person aggrieved by a decision of the Agency may appeal the matter to the franchise authority for hearing and determination. The franchise authority may accept, reject or modify the decision of the Agency and may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of the grantee under any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. No adjustment, settlement or compromise, whether instituted by the Agency of by the franchise authority, shall be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or of the franchise agreement, and neither the Agency nor the franchise authority shall have the right or authority to add to, modify or delete any provision of this chapter or of the franchise. The grantee shall notify subscribers at the time of initial subscription to the system of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints by delivering to each subscriber a notice in a form approved by the Agency. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.28 - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(A)	Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a grantee shall be done under the supervision and direction of the Agency under permits issued for work by the Chairperson of the franchise entity and shall be done in such a manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the franchise entity. A grantee shall, at its own costs and expense, and in a manner approved by the Agency, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, or the franchise entity may at its option repair, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done and said grantee shall be liable to the Entity for the cost thereof and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways and easements of the franchise entity. These maps shall be available for inspection at any time during business hours by any official of the franchise authority. 
(B)	A grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any of its property when required by the franchise entity by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, road construction, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracts or any other type of governmental improvements; provided, however, that the grantee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. If the franchise entity requests substantial relocating, it shall compensate grantee in the amount of its relocation costs. 
(C)	A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchise entity, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48-hours' notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(D)	A grantee shall have the authority to trim the trees upon and overhanging the public streets so as to prevent the branches from coming in contact with the wire and cables of the grantee, except that, at the option of the franchise authority, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
(E)	In all sections of the Franchise Area where the cable wires, or other similar facilities or public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.29 - Construction. 
(A)	A grantee shall extend the installation of cables, amplifiers and related equipment throughout the area covered by its franchise as rapidly as practicable, but, in any event, shall: 
(1)	Begin engineering studies within 30 days after accepting its franchise;
(2)	Begin construction of its proposed system within two months after receiving certification from the FCC; 
(3)	Begin rendering service to subscribers within one year after receiving certification from the FCC; 
(4)	The grantee shall be capable of providing service no more than 60 days after receiving an application for service to every dwelling unit within the franchise area except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or other factors render making service available impracticable. 
(B)	Failure on the part of a grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein shall be grounds for termination of its franchise pursuant to the terms of § 112.04; provided, however, that the franchise authority may in its discretion extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reasons of circumstances beyond its control. 
(C)	In the event the operation of any part of a cable television system is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system has been installed on any public street without complying with requirements of the grantee's franchise, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given 10-days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system. Any property which the grantee allows to remain in place 60 days after having been notified by the franchise entity that it must be removed shall be considered permanently abandoned and shall become the property of the franchise entity subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement. 
(D)	Upon the failure of a grantee to satisfactorily complete any work upon the public streets as may be required by law or the terms of its franchise within the time prescribed, the franchise entity, at its option, may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the franchise entity the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized report. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.30 - Indemnity bond. 
(A)	Concurrently with the acceptance of its franchise a grantee shall file with the Agency a bond with an acceptable surety in the amount of $5,000.00 to indemnify the franchise entity against any losses it may suffer in the event the grantee fails to comply with one or more or the provisions of its franchise. The bond shall be obtained at the sole expense of the grantee and remain in effect for the full term of the franchise or any renewal thereof plus an additional six months thereafter. The grantee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damages or loss suffered by the franchise entity as a result of the grantee's nonperformance, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost or removal of any property of the grantee in the event of default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide for 30-days' prior written notice to the franchise authority of any intention on the part of the grantee to cancel, fail to renew or otherwise materially alter its terms. 
(B)	Neither the filing of an indemnity bond with the Agency, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the franchise authority thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(C)	The requirements of filing an indemnity bond may be waived by the franchise authority upon successful operation of the system by grantee for a period of two years after granting of any franchise. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.31 - Franchise payments. 
(A)	Any person awarded a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the franchise entity, each year during the life of the franchise, a franchise fee in the amount of percent or maximum rates allowed of its annual gross revenues derived from its operation of the franchise cable television system within the franchise area limits. The franchise authority may waive a franchise fee of percent on all installation fees if it so desires. If the franchise fee is waived on installation fees, said installation fees must first be approved by the franchise authority and not exceed the actual cost of said installation. The amount of any application fee shall be a credit against the first year's franchise fee. 
(B)	A grantee shall file with the Agency, within 90 days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement certified by a responsible officer of the grantee, showing in detail the gross revenues, as defined herein, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay the franchise entity within 15 days after the time for filing such statements the sum prescribed above or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year covered by such statements. 
(C)	The franchise entity shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross subscriber revenues from which its franchise payments are computed and shall also have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the chapter. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the franchise entity may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder; however, an accounting rendered to the franchise entity and to which no exception is made within three years after receipt by the franchise entity shall be deemed to be accurate and shall not thereafter be subject to question or made the basis of any claim by franchise entity against grantee. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.32 - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his or her request. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.33 - Public service requirements. 
A grantee shall: 
(A)	Provide at least one service outlet to all county facilities and public schools within its franchise area at no cost to the franchise entity or school involved and shall charge only its time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities; 
(B)	Make its facilities immediately available to the franchise entity upon request during the course of any emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Sec. 112.34 - Tampering, unauthorized connections and the like. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound within the franchise entity. 
(B)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within the franchise entity for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1990)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Chapter 113 - ELECTRIC UTILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - UTILITY SUBSCRIBER NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 113.01 - Determination of need. 
The Clay County Board of County Commissioners has determined that efficient and effective operation of its property tax assessment rolls, its E-911 system, and its refuse collection operations requires that the electric utility systems doing business within the county provide the county with specific user information of a non-private nature. 
(Ord. No. 04-109, 4-6-2004)
Sec. 113.02 - Provision of information. 
Every electric utility system providing electric service to residences, businesses, industry, and every other public and private enterprise within Clay County shall provide to the county offices, the name, mailing address and physical address of every subscriber desiring: 
(A)	New service;
(B)	Discontinuation of service; or
(C)	Relocation of service.
(Ord. No. 04-109, 4-6-2004)
Sec. 113.03 - Information required. 
Every electric utility system providing information shall include, at a minimum, the name in which the service is subscribed, the physical location of the service, the billing address of the subscriber, and, if a relocation of service, the previous physical location. Also required, if available, is the subscriber's contact telephone number at the physical location; this will be for E-911 verification purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-109, 4-6-2004)
Sec. 113.04 - Time frame; method of provision. 
Every electric utility system covered under this division shall provide the required information within five working days after the utility fulfills the customer's work order. Each utility shall provide said information simultaneously via email and U.S. Postal Service to each county office requiring said information. The county shall provide a standard form for information provision. 
(Ord. No. 04-109, 4-6-2004)
Chapter 114 - BROWN BAGGING 

Sec. 114.01 - Purpose. 
(A)	This chapter has been enacted in the furtherance of the police powers of the local governing authority in accordance with the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, deterring the criminal element, including drug related criminal activity, eliminating congestion in roads and streets, promoting desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods, and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Clay County. 
(B)	The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to regulation of alcoholic beverages generally. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 114.02 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Any person means the owner, operator, manager, employee, corporate officer, or director of the business establishment and the patron, customer, or consumer at the business establishment. 
Bottle club or bring your own bottle means any restaurant, music hall, theater, private club, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. The term "bottle club" or "bring your own bottle" or "BYOB" shall be included in the definition of "brown bagging." 
Brown bagging means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business, restaurant, music hall, theater, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business licensed to operate within the county, or into a business, restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business which should be licensed to operate within the county, but which business, restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business is not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; provided, however, that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. The term "brown bagging" also means "bottle club" or "bring your own bottle." 
Consume or consumption means any ingestion of alcoholic beverages, beer and light wine or the possession of any alcoholic beverages, beer, and light wine in any type of drinking container or in any bottle, can or other container upon which the seal, cork or cap has been opened. 
Food Service establishment means a business: 
(1)	Where meals are prepared on the premises and regularly served to the public for adequate compensation each day the establishment is open. 
(2)	Contains one or more dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food. 
(3)	Have a valid health department food service permit and other applicable local, state, or federal permits or licenses for food service. 
(4)	Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, for at least twenty-five (25) persons. 
Premises means the building in which the public or private commercial establishment is located and the land, parking lot and improvements connected with or serving such establishment, which land, parking lot and improvements are under the possession or control of the proprietor of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 114.03 - Brown bagging prohibited. 
(A)	Brown bagging is prohibited in the unincorporated areas of Clay County.
(B)	Brown bagging shall also include the following prohibited acts:
(1)	Any person who brown bags;
(2)	Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown bagged;
(3)	Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy or food service provider as defined herein; 
(4)	Any employee of the business, restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business in whose presence brown bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(C)	Brown bagging shall not include or prohibit the following: The providing of alcoholic beverages at a function sponsored by a nonprofit organization, association, or other organization where the alcoholic beverages are provided by the holder of one or more licenses pursuant to the alcoholic beverage ordinance of the county and the alcoholic beverages are served and poured by employees of such licensee or licensees; provided, however, no function shall be held at the same location more than once in any 30-day period. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 114.04 - Exception for food service vendors and patrons. 
(A)	Food service establishments shall be exempt from the prohibition of brown bagging provided food sales are seventy-five percent (75%) of the establishment's gross receipts. The owner, operator, manager, employee, or corporate officer or director of the establishment, and patron, customer, or consumer, provided the establishment qualifies for such exemption, shall not be prosecuted hereunder. 
(B)	Proof of gross receipts and food service sales shall be provided at the request of the commission by statement from a certified public accountant reporting the percentage of the establishment's gross receipts and total sales derived from food service. Failure to provide such proof within ten days of the request by the commission shall subject the establishment to summarily have its business license suspended and its owner, manager, employee, or corporate officer or director to be prosecuted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 114.05 - Penalty. 
(A)	The business license of any promises upon which brown bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the County Commission. Such a suspension or revocation action shall follow the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(B)	Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the Magistrate Court to a charge of brown bagging shall be admissible in any license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(C)	Any person violating this chapter, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the Clay County Jail. 
(D)	No person accused of violating this chapter shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 114.06 - Court proceedings. 
(A)	Violations of this chapter shall be tried upon citations issued by the Sheriff of Clay County, the deputies thereof, constables, and all other law enforcement officers, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. 
(B)	Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Clay County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
(C)	Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(D)	A violation of this chapter shall cause any regulatory or business license issued by the county to be revoked upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 07-003, 7-3-2007)
Chapter 115 - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 115.01 - Purpose. 
This article has been enacted in the furtherance of the police powers of the local governing authority in accordance with the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, deterring the criminal element, including drug related criminal activity, eliminating congestion in roads and streets, promoting desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods, and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Clay County. 
(Ord. No. 07-004, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 115.02 - Conditions of operating within unincorporated areas of county. 
Private clubs operated within the unincorporated areas of Clay County, Georgia shall be in compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the licenses of businesses (except as expressly exempted therein) and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-004, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 115.03 - Hours of operations. 
Private clubs shall operate or be open except between the hours of 2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, private clubs shall not be operated or opened after Sunday 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. Monday next. 
(Ord. No. 07-004, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 115.04 - Closing, clearing of premises. 
All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents, employees, corporate officers, or directors of a holder of a private club license shall cease operations of on the premises for which a license has been issued by the county as of 2:01 a.m. each week day and Saturday and 12:01 a.m. on Sunday, and shall require all patrons or parties to vacate the premises from which a license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. each week day and 12:30 a.m. on Sunday, which shall include parking lots, buildings, and curtilage. 
(Ord. No. 07-004, 7-3-2007)
Sec. 115.05 - Penalties. 
(A)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in this Code, which may include a fine or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation provided in this chapter. 
(B)	The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any license issued by the county. 
(1)	For the first violation there shall be a $500.00 fine.
(2)	For the second and all subsequent violations, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine. 
(3)	For any violation beyond the third, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, any county issued regulatory or business license shall be revoked. 
(4)	A license holder who receives a suspension or revocation of his license may not be an officer, director or shareholder of any succeeding entity that holds a license from the county during his period of suspension. 
(5)	A violation of this chapter shall cause any regulatory or business license issued by the county to be revoked upon conviction and amended hereby. 
(Ord. No. 07-004, 7-3-2007)
Chapter 116 - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 116.01 - Tax levied; rate. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax at the rate of five percent of the rent paid for the occupancy of any room or rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity located within the unincorporated portions of Clay County operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charge for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more consecutive days for use by Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) excepting contracts by and between the county and Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 1, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.02 - Duty of establishment operator to collect tax. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of any establishment covered by § 116.01 above to collect the tax on occupants as hereinabove imposed in § 116.01. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 2, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.03 - Registration of business required. 
(A)	Every person engaging in, or about to engage in, business as an operator or any establishment covered by § 116.01 of this chapter shall immediately register said business with Clay County, on a form provided by the county for such purposes. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the county. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or general partner in case or ownership by an association or partnership; or by an appropriate officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(B)	A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator.
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 3, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.04 - Certificate of authority to collect tax. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinabove provided, Clay County shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. Such certificate of authority shall also constitute a license by the county to operate such an establishment; provided, however, that such license shall not relieve the operator from obtaining any other required licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 4, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.05 - Tax due date. 
All taxes levied by this section shall be due and payable to Clay County monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the county. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 5, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.06 - Deduction allowed operator for collecting tax. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the total amount collected. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 6, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.07 - Failure to file return. 
(A)	If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the county. 
(B)	The Board of Commissioners or its designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her/its address as it appears in the county's records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(C)	The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(D)	In addition, a penalty of five percent of the tax due or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the county. 
(E)	The estimated tax, together with applicable penalties and interest, may be collected utilizing any of the enforcement methods set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 7, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.08 - Required records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county may require. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 8, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.09 - Powers of Board of Commissioners. 
The Board of Commissioners or its designated representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To examine, or authorize the examination of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities or any operator subject to this chapter, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)	To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals which are subject to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)	To allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 9, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.10 - Court action for delinquent taxes. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax is required to be collected becomes due and payable, the County Attorney, at the direction of the Board of Commissioners, may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 10, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.11 - Change in ownership of business. 
If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this section and subsequent thereto sells out or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he/she/it shall become personally liable therefore to the extent of the tax owed, together with any applicable penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 11, 3-4-2008)
Sec. 116.12 - Enforcement; penalties for violation. 
(A)	A person who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Clay County and upon conviction, shall be assessed with any penalty, including fine, confinement, or both, allowed by law for the violation of county ordinances. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(B)	In order to enforce this chapter or to correct or abate any violation of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, in addition to other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 08-009, § 12, 3-4-2008)
Chapter 117 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 117.01 - Wireless enhanced 911 charge. 
The wireless enhanced 911 charge imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of Clay County, Georgia, shall be increased to $1.50 per month per wireless connection provided to each telephone subscriber. 
(Res. No. 06-002, 2-21-2006)
Sec. 117.02. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Res. No. 11-003, 12-28-2011)
Sec. 117.03. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Res. No. 11-003, 12-28-2011)
Sec. 117.04. - Administrative provisions. 
The Clerk of the County is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 11-003, 12-28-2011)
Sec. 117.05. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this chapter shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Res. No. 11-003, 12-28-2011)
Sec. 117.06. - Penalty/court proceedings. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in this Code, which may include a fine or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation provided in this chapter. 
(b)	The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any license issued by the county. 
(1)	For the first violation there shall be a $500.00 fine.
(2)	For the second and all subsequent violations, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine. 
(c)	A violation of this chapter shall cause any regulatory or business license issued by the county to be revoked upon conviction. 
(d)	Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Res. No. 11-003, 12-28-2011)
Chapter 118 - BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS AND OPERATORS 

Sec. 118.01. - Authority, scope and applicability. 
(a)	This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 31-40-1 through 31-40-10, as amended. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this chapter. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this chapter. The Commission of Clay County specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within Clay County due to dwellings, buildings, structures or properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary features; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of Clay County; or which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. Such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties are declared to be a public nuisance. Power is conferred upon Clay County to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, structures or properties as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	All the provisions of this chapter may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or Clay County Building Inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. 
(c)	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within Clay County whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.02. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. Any and all body art procedures not explicitly mentioned in these rules and regulations must be approved by the Clay County Board of Health prior to being performed in a body art facility. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.03. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.04. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
"Antibacterial Solution" means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
"Body Art" means the practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators utilizing, but not limited to the following techniques: Body piercing, tattooing and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include implants under the skin, tattoo removal or any other practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board. 
"Body Art Establishment" means any place or premises, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed. 
"Body Piercing" means any method of piercing the skin or mucosa, except the entire ear, in order to place any object including, but not limited to, rings, studs, bars or other forms of jewelry through the skin or mucosa. 
"Body Piercing Artist" means any person who performs piercing. 
"County" means the County of Clay, Georgia or its duly authorized representatives. 
"Currently Licensed Health Care Professional" includes physicians, physician assistant (PA), nurse practitioner, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians (I) or (P), holding current licenses with the State of Georgia within their respective fields. 
"Department" means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
"FDA" means the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
"Instruments Used for Body Art" means any object or instrument used in the performance of body art procedures, which may come into contact with a client's bodily fluid during the performance of a body art procedure, and includes, but is not limited to, hand pieces, needles, needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body fluid during body art procedures. 
"Operator" means any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations, regardless whether actually performing body art procedures or not. The term includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art procedures. 
"OSHA" means the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
"Owner/Proprietor" means the partnership, the corporation, the association or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the body art establishment and who are legally responsible for the operation of the establishment. 
"Permit" means the authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a body art establishment. 
"Sanitary" means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
"Sanitized" means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count, including pathogens, to a safe level on equipment. 
"Spore" means a small, usually single-celled, asexually- or sexually-reproductive body that is highly resistant to desiccation and heat and is capable of growing into a new organism, produced especially by certain bacteria, fungi, algae and nonflowering plants. 
"Standard Precautions" means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), which includes specific recommendations for the use of gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or body fluids containing blood is anticipated. These guidelines and controls may be found in "Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health Care Settings", Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), August 21, 1987, Vol. 36, No. (SU02); 001; "Universal Precautions for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and other Blood-borne Pathogens in Health-Care Settings", MMWR, June 24,1988, Vol. 37, No. 24; "Guidelines for Prevention and Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers", MMWR, June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6; and MMWR; and "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures", July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. (RR08); 1-9. These guidelines are hereby incorporated by reference into this rule. 
"Sterilization" means holding an instrument in an autoclave for 15 minutes at 15 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
"Tattoo Artist" means any person who performs tattooing. 
"Tattooing" means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any person within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
"Universal Precautions" means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which includes specific recommendations for the use of gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or body fluids containing blood is anticipated. These guidelines and controls may be found at 29 C.F.R. 1910.1030, and are hereby incorporated by reference into this rule. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.05. - Governing body. 
(a)	The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this chapter, with the requirements in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, and with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Clay County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)	Prior to being granted a permit each body art establishment shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(1)	No person under the age of 18 shall be tattooed except that a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to do. 
(2)	No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of the ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 years without the presence, consent, and proper identification of a parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian unless under the direct supervision of a physician. 
(3)	Body art operators shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(4)	No person shall receive a body art procedure that appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(5)	No animals, except for guide animals accompanying disabled persons, shall be allowed in the body art establishment. 
(6)	Written report of any infection of allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to the county within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.06. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)	The body art establishment shall be constructed, arranged and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)	The establishment shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the body art procedure adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)	Body art establishments must have adequate ventilation.
(d)	Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering should be light in color in the work area. 
(e)	Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material which would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)	A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)	At least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the operator for washing their hands and preparing customers for body art procedures shall be easily accessible to each work station. This station shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single-use towels, and individual hand brushes for each artist. 
(h)	The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting.
(i)	The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms.
(j)	Enough potable water for the needs of the body art establishment shall be provided from an approved source that is a public water system; or a nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained and operated according to applicable state or local codes and shall meet state drinking water quality standards. 
(k)	Sewage disposal shall be disposed through an approved facility that is:
(1)	A public sewage treatment plant; or
(2)	An individual sewage disposal system that is sized, constructed, maintained and operated according to law. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.07. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)	Furnishings of the body art establishment shall be maintained in good condition, intact and functional. The establishment shall be kept clean, neat and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)	Facilities for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon and stencils shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)	Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each operator.
(1)	Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant, and easily sanitized. Work tables and chairs should be light in color. 
(2)	Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with an antibacterial solution after each application. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.08. - Reserved. 
Sec. 118.09. - Supplies. 
(a)	Bulk single-use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)	All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single-use containers, applied only to a single individual, and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.10. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)	All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be obtained from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)	In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by the operator, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each client. 
(c)	After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.11. - Piercing jewelry. 
(a)	Client and body piercing artist should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure beings. 
(b)	Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316LVM series), titanium or platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. 
(c)	Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by body piercing artists. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 118.13. - Sanitation. 
(a)	Prior to the start of the body art procedure the operator should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores and abrasions. If a cut, sore or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)	All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc., should be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)	Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the operator shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands shall then be dried by single-use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)	Single-use, disposable, FDA-approved examination gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the body art procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)	Each operator shall follow the standard precautions as published by the Centers for Disease Control. 
(f)	Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)	Smoking and consumption of food or drink by the artist is prohibited in the workstation.
(h)	Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines.
(i)	Only single-use disposable needles shall be used in the tattooing process.
(j)	Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the daily operating hours. 
(k)	Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to receive body art procedures. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.14. - Sterilization. 
(a)	An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each body art establishment.
(b)	Used nondisposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture-resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)	The following procedures shall be followed during the sterilization process:
(1)	Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, dated and sealed.
(2)	Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. 
(3)	Instruments shall remain in the autoclave 55 minutes from a cold start.
(4)	If the process begins with a hot start then instruments should be processed for 35 minutes. 
(5)	To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit (133.89 Celsius) and 15-30 psi. 
(6)	There must be a sterilization indicator in each autoclaving to monitor the sterilization procedure. The indicator must indicate exposure to steam and 250 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(7)	Body art operations shall demonstrate, using spore destruction tests, that their autoclaves are capable of attaining the minimum operating standards recommended by the manufacturer of the autoclave. These tests shall be performed every 30 days and verified through an independent laboratory. Spore destruction tests shall be maintained on file at the body art establishment. Spore tests shall be provided to the county upon request. 
(8)	Autoclaves shall be cleaned at the frequency recommended by the manufacturer. Autoclaves shall be serviced at the frequency by the manufacturer, but not less than once a year. A copy of the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning and servicing must be maintained on file in the body art establishment. 
(9)	All clean or packaged sterilized instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry closed cabinets or tightly covered containers. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.15. - Temporary, special event and mobile body art requirements. 
All provisions of these regulations shall apply with the following exceptions: 
(a)	Hand wash facilities shall be easily accessible to each procedure area and designated for use by the operator only. Hand wash facilities shall comply with the requirements of subsection 118.20(g) of this article or, temporary hand wash facilities shall consist of soap, single-use paper towels and an adequate supply of potable water dispensed through a continuous flow spout. Wastewater shall be collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(b)	Body art operators may bring pre-sterilized instruments, or instruments which have been sterilized at another location with documentation showing a negative spore test result within the previous seven days. On-site sterilization units may be used and shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.16. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)	Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the operator shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)	If an acetate stencil is used by an operator for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)	If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)	If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.17. - Body piercing preparation. 
(a)	Set up equipment in front of client.
(b)	Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(c)	Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a nonhazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. Any jewelry contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) shall not be reused. 
(d)	Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(e)	Pre-sterilize all forceps, tubes, etc., in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.18. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)	The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)	After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)	A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed nonsticking pads.
(d)	The client shall then be given written instructions on caring for the tattoo/piercing during the healing process. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.19. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each body art establishment must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner/proprietor must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the establishment, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the establishment. A copy of the schedule shall be submitted to the county along with the application for permit. The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)	Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of body art procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)	Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each body art procedure. 
(3)	Inspect and decontaminate, on a regular basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails and cans that have likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contaminations are visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately or as soon as feasible. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.20. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)	Needles, razors or other sharp instruments used during body art procedures, shall be placed in puncture-resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)	Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand.
(c)	Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to an approved facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous. 
(d)	Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight-fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)	Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use.
(f)	Disposable waste shall be handled, stored and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)	Each workstation shall be supplied with a container for sharp waste and a container for disposable waste. These containers shall not be overfilled. 
(h)	All waste must be disposed of in an approved manner.
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.21. - Personnel. 
(a)	Unless the individual is a currently licensed health care professional, persons performing the body art procedures shall obtain current certification in first-aid/CPR, and proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the Clay County Health Department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration. 
(b)	Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. 
(c)	The owner/proprietor of the establishment must maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures, which will be available for inspection. This file must include a copy of the current operator's permit, required medical records and documentation of the required training. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.22. - Client files. 
(a)	For each client, proper records of body art administered shall be maintained by the studio. 
(b)	Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, date of body art, design, its location and name of the operator. 
(c)	A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the body art must be maintained on file. 
(d)	A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)	A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the body art procedure shall be maintained on file. 
(f)	A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the body art procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.23. - Application for permit. 
(a)	The governing body of each body art establishment shall submit to the county a written application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No body art establishment shall be operated and body art shall not be performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)	The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county, and shall be submitted to the County Clerk with an application for the permit fee. 
(c)	Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the body art establishment showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. 
(d)	A listing of the names of all staff, including the owner/proprietor who will be working in the establishment, shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(e)	The ownership of the establishment disclosed in its application for a permit.
(f)	Zoning and other local requirements (if applicable) regarding proper location and establishment of body art establishment must be approved prior to the issuance of any permit pursuant to this article by the county. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.24. - Operator/artist permit. 
(a)	No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the county. 
(b)	Persons performing the tattoo or body piercing operation shall be 18 years of age or older. 
(c)	The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the county. 
(d)	Application for the operator/artist permit shall include:
(1)	Name;
(2)	Date of birth;
(3)	Sex;
(4)	Residence address;
(5)	Mailing address;
(6)	Phone number;
(7)	Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist;
(8)	Training and/or experience;
(9)	Required medical information;
(10)	Photo identification;
(11)	Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program and CPR/first aid course given or approved by the county. 
(e)	All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.25. - Permit. 
(a)	The owner/proprietor of each body art establishment shall obtain a valid permit from the county prior to beginning operation. To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(b)	The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(c)	Permits are not transferable from one establishment to another.
(d)	A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the county when the establishment ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)	An establishment which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county pursuant to this article including, but not limited to denial or revocation of its permit by the county. 
(f)	Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be automatically suspended upon the suspension or revocation of any similar permit granted to the establishment by any other county, state, federal or regulatory authority. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.26. - Inspections. 
(a)	The establishment and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county. 
(b)	A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the County Office. 
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 118.27. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with the authority vested in the county pursuant to its Charter. 
(b)	No person shall engage in body art except in a permitted establishment.
(c)	The county may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art establishment which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if an establishment violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the County Board of Commissioners. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(d)	The county is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of this article. 
(e)	A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine.
(Res. No. 10-086, § 1, 12-7-2010)
TITLE XIII - GENERAL OFFENSES 
(RESERVED) 
TITLE XV - LAND USAGE 
Chapter 150 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 150.01 - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon in the County of Clay utilizing any of the following services, individually or in combination: subdivision, demolition, water, electric, sewer and cesspool, without having first applied for and obtained from the County Clerk a building permit. All other physical development is exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance unless required by the Department of Health. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1988; Res. No. 08-021, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 12-011, § 1, 8-7-2012)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 150.99. 
Sec. 150.02 - Application. 
Application for such permits shall be made to the County Clerk and shall be accompanied by an on-site sewage management system permit application, obtained from the County Board of Health. No building permit will be issued without an on-site sewage management system permit application. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1988; Res. No. 08-021, 6-3-2008)
Sec. 150.03 - Fees. 
(A)	An administrative fee of $25.00 will be charged to cover the costs of processing the permit by the County Clerk. 
(B)	This fee will be paid at the office of the County Clerk at the time of application.
(C)	Fees shall not be charged for Demolition Permits.
(D)	Subdivision Permit Fees shall be $25.00 per lot and must have the approval of the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners before permit issuance. 
(E)	All prior citations issued and fees paid since April 12, 2012, to and by those parties no longer subject of this ordinance shall be deemed repealed and adjusted refunds issued. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1988; Res. No. 08-021, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 12-011, §§ 1, 3, 8-7-2012)
Sec. 150.04 - Enforcement. 
Electrical service shall not be supplied to any new structure without a building permit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1988)
DIVISION 2. - E-911 STRUCTURE NUMBERING 

Sec. 150.20 - Posting of designated structure numbers. 
(A)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall be notified in writing by the implementing agency of the number assigned to the same at any time after adoption of this division. 
(B)	Within 60 days after receipt of such written notification the owner, occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall cause the same to be posted in either one or two locations depending upon the following conditions: 
(1)	If the mailbox is located on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be affixed to the mailbox in letters two inches in height or larger and of fluorescent color contrasting with the color of the mailbox. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of the structure if so desired; 
(2)	If the mailbox is not on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be posted at two locations: 
(a)	On the mailbox as prescribed by U.S. Postal Service Regulations; and
(b)	Either on the structure front if visible from the street or on an above the ground sign attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb. The numbers shall be two inches in height or larger and of a fluorescent color contrasting with the color of the background. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of his or her structure if so desired; 
(3)	In the case that a building is served by two or more driveways or curb cuts the number shall be assigned and posted to the front entrance or driveway; 
(4)	It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use, upon affixing the assigned number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.21 - Type of numbers. 
(A)	Two types of numbers are used under this section.
(B)	A primary number to be assigned to each street frontage of each parcel of land, whether or not the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified under § 150.20(A). Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
(1)	Existing numbered units and uses shall retain the present set of addresses with only the primary number being changed if the primary number being changed is not in sequence with the overall system. 
(2)	Building on a single parcel with more than one and less than five units may be given letter (preferred) or number designations as requested by the owner. 
(3)	A single building on a single parcel of land and with five or more units may be given numerical designations such as Suite 5, Apartment 5, if so desired. 
(4)	Multiple buildings on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designations if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. Generally the number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. 
(5)	Mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks and parcel uses shall be given letter designations for lots or sections and number designations for individual lots or sites. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.22 - Exempt and excluded structures. 
(A)	The intent of this division is to exclude from this division those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire to other events. 
(B)	The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions:
(1)	Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address such as a barn, poultry house outbuilding or equipment storage buildings; 
(2)	Storage and accessory building for the use of the occupant of another building on the property; 
(3)	Buildings used as dwelling units, offices or the nominal workstation of an employee or requiring a separate mailing address shall not be exempt. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.23 - New structures and lots. 
(A)	Structure numbers will be assigned to each new lot, tract or building site on the original drawings of a final subdivision plat, mobile home park plan or planned unit development. 
(B)	No building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit for any new or remodeled or repaired structure will be issued following the implementation of this division in the affected area of Clay County until the owner, developer or builder has procured from the Clay County Board of Commissioners or its designee the official structure number or numbers. Final approval for occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired, or use requiring the number, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the standards of this division. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.24 - Road numbers. 
(A)	The Clay County Commissioners have established and assigned numbers for all roads and public ways in the unincorporated areas of Clay County. 
(B)	No new road numbers assigned shall be duplicate of any existing road number in the unincorporated areas of Clay County. 
(C)	Existing duplicate road numbers shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the Enhanced 911 System in Clay County, as determined in the judgment of the County Commission. 
(D)	As many segmental roads as possible shall be identified as being a continuous road, thereby eliminating as many road identifying names and numbers as possible. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.25 - Utility company compliance. 
(A)	Following the implementation of this division in any area of Clay County, all utility services regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission or any utility cooperative service organization, shall withhold service from any building until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid structure number. 
(B)	It shall be the responsibility of the Clay County Board of Commissioners or its designee to notify each affected utility service of each implementation area by issuing maps and lists of official numbers assigned each structure or use. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.26 - Implementation by Clay County departments. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the Clay County Board of Commissioners shall not render any non-emergency service until the occupant, owner or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid structure number. Non-emergency service includes any service provided by the Board of Commissioners except fire, rescue, law enforcement or emergency medical service. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Sec. 150.99 - Penalty. 
(A)	Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this Code. 
(B)	Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by §§ 150.20 et seq. as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by §§ 150.20 et seq. as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Clay County and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine to not exceed $500.00. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 7-3-2001)
Chapter 151 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 151.01 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Georgia has in the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, § II, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia does ordain as follows in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.02 - Findings of fact. 
(A)	The flood hazard areas of Clay County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(B)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.03 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(A)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(B)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(C)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(D)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(E)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.04 - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(A)	To protect human life and health;
(B)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(C)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(D)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(E)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(F)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(G)	To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.05 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission's and the Emergency Management Director's (Sheriff) interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in § 151.07. 
Base flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Buildings. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction. Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before April 1, 1997 (including, the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 1, 1997 (including the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBH). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U. S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b)	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home. A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction. Any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after April 1, 1997 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)). 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 1, 1997. (The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.) 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four-hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Start of construction. The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)	The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.06 - Lands to which chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Clay County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.07 - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(A)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated (not applicable), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for (not applicable) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(B)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS (not applicable). 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
DIVISION 2. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 151.20 - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required. 
(A)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(B)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(C)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(D)	Elevated buildings: all new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(1)	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(a)	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
(c)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
(2)	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises or entry to the elevated area; and 
(3)	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(E)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(F)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(G)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(H)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(I)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(J)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.21 - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(A)	New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of § 151.20(D). 
(B)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A130, AE or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in § 151.42. 
(C)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(1)	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on:
(a)	Individual lots or parcels;
(b)	In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
(c)	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
(d)	On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation; 
(2)	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(a)	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(b)	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade; 
(c)	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(d)	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of division (C)(1)(c). 
(D)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.07 are areas designated as a floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(2)	Only if subsection (D)(1) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.22 - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A Zones). 
(A)	Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.07, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 151.07, then the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 151.20(D). 
(B)	The Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.23 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
(A)	Areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.07 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. 
(B)	The following provisions apply:
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 151.20(D). The Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file; 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in § 151.41; 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.24 - Standards for subdivisions. 
(A)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(B)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(C)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(D)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.25 - Variance procedures. 
(A)	The City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission as established by the Clay County Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)	The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(C)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as provided in Pataula District. 
(D)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(E)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(F)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(G)	In reviewing such requests, the City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(H)	Conditions for variances:
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(a)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(b)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(c)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; 
(2)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction. Therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation; 
(4)	The City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission and the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(I)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the City of Bluffton/Fort Gaines/Clay County Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 151.40 - Designation of administrator. 
The Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) is appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.41 - Permit procedures. 
(A)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities. 
(B)	Specifically, the following information is required.
(1)	Application stage.
(a)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
(b)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed. 
(c)	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of § 151.21(B). 
(d)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)	Construction stage.
(a)	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.42 - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
Duties of the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(A)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(B)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file; 
(C)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 151.07, then the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of §§ 151.20 et seq.; 
(D)	Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with § 151.41; 
(E)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with § 151.41; 
(F)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with § 151.21(B) and § 151.23(B) or § 151.41; 
(G)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(H)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained; 
(I)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter; 
(J)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Emergency Management Director (Sheriff) and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.43 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.44 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.45 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.46 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(A)	Considered as minimum requirements;
(B)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.47 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Clay County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Sec. 151.99 - Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Clay County taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997)
Chapter 152 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 04-111, adopted Oct. 5, 2004, deleted the former Ch. 152, §§ 152.01—152.03, 152.20—152.24, 152.35—152.38, 152.50—152.55 and 152.99, and enacted a new Ch. 152 as set out herein. The former Ch. 152 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from an ordinance passed May 1, 2001.

Sec. 152.01 - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Clay County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.02 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission: The State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department: The Department of Natural Resources. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
District: The Pataula Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity; also known as the plan. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in § 152.03(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). For the purposes of this chapter, the local issuing authority shall be the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Pataula Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment- producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.03 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, Mineral Resources and Caves Act; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in § 152.04 of this chapter and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of § 152.04 of this chapter and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, Definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of § 152.04(C) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and for purposes of this paragraph, state waters excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.04 - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(A)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of § 152.04(B) and (C) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(B)	Minimum requirements/BMPs.
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in § 152.04(B) and (C) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(C)	Minimum protections. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in § 152.04(B)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(a)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(a)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines.
(D)	Stream buffer requirements may exceed minimum requirements. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in § 152.04(B) and (C) of this chapter. 
(E)	Liability for injury to another property. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.05 - Application/permit process. 
(A)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(B)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the Clay County jurisdictional boundaries without first obtaining a permit from the Clay County Building Department to perform such activity. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Clay County Building Department and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in § 152.05(C) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of § 152.04(B) and (C) of this chapter. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)	A fee, in the amount of $5.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by § 152.04(C)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per Section V B.5.(b) [sic], have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(C)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in § 152.04(B) and (C) of this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. 
(2)	Data required for site plan.
(a)	Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(b)	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project.
(c)	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner.
(d)	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(e)	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.
(f)	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
(g)	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(h)	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
(i)	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(j)	Maintenance statement: Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source. 
(3)	Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the Commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
(a)	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
(b)	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
(c)	Boundary line survey.
(d)	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
(e)	Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following:

 
(f)	Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(g)	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
(h)	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(i)	Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable.
(j)	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(D)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 152.04(C)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section V B. 5.(b) [sic] are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.06 - Inspection and enforcement. 
(A)	The Clay County Building Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permitee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(B)	The Clay County Building Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(C)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the Commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(D)	The districts or the Commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the Commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(E)	The Board, on or before September 30, 2004, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.07 - Penalties and incentives. 
(A)	Failure to obtain permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(B)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(C)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section V B. 5.(b) [sic]. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(D)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.08 - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(A)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Clay County Building Board of Appeals within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(B)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Clay County. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Sec. 152.09 - Validity and liability. 
(A)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(B)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 04-111, § 2, 10-5-2004)
Chapter 153 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 153.01 - Title. 
These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of Clay County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.02 - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the Board of Commissioners of Clay County to consider land subdivision plats as part of its program for the orderly, efficient and economical development of Clay County. This means, among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace; that proper provision shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewerage and other needed improvements; that all proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with the development pattern of the neighboring properties; that the proposed streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to the Official Map, shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the Comprehensive Plan and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the prospective traffic to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of fire fighting equipment to buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.03 - Purposes. 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(A)	To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare;
(B)	To encourage the development of economically sound and stable land developments;
(C)	To assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(D)	To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
(E)	To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan of the community; 
(F)	To assure coordination of improvement plans and programs within Clay County;
(G)	To assure proper legal description, identification, monumentation and recordation of real estate boundaries; 
(H)	To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform standards and procedures; 
(I)	To protect individuals from buying lands which are not suited for intended purposes because of lot size, access or flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.04 - Authority and adoption. 
(A)	These subdivision rules and regulations are adopted as an ordinance by the Board of Commissioners of Clay County. 
(B)	The Joint Planning Commission of Clay County/City of Fort Gaines/City of Bluffton shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Clay County unless it shall have the approval of the Planning Commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the Planning Commission as required by this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.05 - Jurisdiction. 
(A)	These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as described herein, located within Clay County, Georgia. 
(B)	No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on a proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the Planning Commission as certified thereon, and approval of construction plans and profiles by the County Engineer and/or the County Road Department and the Local Board of Health. 
(C)	No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor shall any subdivision plat or part thereof be recorded before obtaining final approval from the Planning Commission. The approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat prior to filing such plat with the Clerk of Superior Court of Clay County, Georgia. 
(D)	No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.06 - Word usage and definitions. 
(A)	Rules of interpretation. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein are interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
(2)	The word "street" includes road, highway, boulevard, and lane.
(3)	The word "watercourse" includes drain, ditch and stream.
(4)	The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the word "may" is permissible.
(B)	Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a difference meaning: 
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets or by other man-made or natural boundaries such as railroad tracks or water bodies. 
Board of Commissioners. The legislative body of Clay County, Georgia. 
Building setback line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding steps, gutters and similar fixtures and the property line when measured perpendicular thereto. 
Comprehensive plan. The Joint Comprehensive Plan for Clay County and the Cities of Fort Gaines and Bluffton, dated 1992, and any amendments thereof. 
County Engineer. An engineer, licensed and registered in Georgia, to perform the duties of County Engineer as therein specified, particularly as associated with the County Road Department. 
Cul-de-sac. A street intersecting another street at one end and permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around at the other. 
Double frontage lot. A continuous (through) lot of the same depth as the width of a block containing two tiers of lots and which is accessible from both of the streets upon which it fronts. 
Dwelling unit. Any structure, or part thereof, designed as a single housekeeping unit and used for living quarters. 
Easement. A grant by the property owner for use, by the public or a person, of a strip of land for specified reasons. 
Final plat. A complete and exact subdivision plan prepared for official recordation as required herein. 
Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers or other waters. 
Flood hazard area. The area or low land adjacent to the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other water body that is susceptible to periodic inundation during a 25-year flood as defined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. 
Lot. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or lease to or separate use of another or for development. The word "lot" includes, but is not limited to, the words plot or parcel. 
Lot area. The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land as shown on a subdivision plat, excluding space within any street right-of-way, but including the area of any easement. 
Lot remnant. A portion of land below the minimum lot size as prescribed for in the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management System. 
Planning Commission. The Clay County/City of Fort Gaines/City of Bluffton Planning Commission. 
Preliminary plat. A tentative subdivision plan indicating the proposed layout of subdivision as required herein. 
Resubdivision. A combination or recombination of previously recorded lots or tracts of contiguous land for the purpose of creating new lots. 
Reverse frontage lot. A lot extending between and having a frontage on an expressway or arterial and a minor or local street and with vehicular access solely from the latter. 
Single tier lot. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, a major arterial, a nonresidential use and to which access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited. 
Sketch plan. A freehand drawing of a proposed subdivision. 
Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. The definition shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(a)	Arterial. A street which expedites movement of through traffic to major traffic generators. Arterials collect and distribute traffic from freeways and expressways to less important major streets or directly to traffic destinations. 
(b)	Collector street. A street which collects and distributes traffic from arterials to access streets or directly to traffic destinations. Collectors generally serve neighborhood traffic generators. 
(c)	Local street. A street which provides vehicular access to the properties abutting it. 
Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation, syndicate or other entity who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision. Division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, including all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. The term subdivision does not apply to the division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Surface drainage plan. A drawing showing all present and proposed grades and facilities for storm water drainage. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES FOR SECURING APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 153.20 - Introduction. 
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made, or before any contract for the sale of, or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or any part thereof is made, or before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or his or her duly authorized agent shall apply for approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.21 - Optional pre-application procedure. 
(A)	At his or her option, a subdivider may prepare a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision for review by the Planning Commission and County Engineer/County Road Department. The sketch plan should include the tentative layout of streets, the total acreage of the proposed development and the approximate number of acres to be devoted to each use if more than one use is being considered, the approximate number and size of lots, any unusual topographical features, such as watercourse, and any and all areas located within the flood hazard areas, river corridor, wetlands and water recharge areas. 
(B)	The sketch plan and all discussions regarding it will be considered as being confidential between the subdivider and the Planning Commission and County Engineer/County Road Department. 
(C)	Favorable consideration by the Planning Commission under no circumstances shall be construed as preliminary or tentative plat approval. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.22 - Submission of preliminary plat. 
(A)	Application. 
(1)	Prior to filing of an application for the approval of a final plat which includes the dedication and acceptance of a new public street or other public improvement, the subdivider shall file an application for consideration of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)	The subdivider or his or her agent shall submit at least four black or blue line prints drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Commission for its review. The Planning Commission shall send one copy to the County Engineer/County Road Department, the Local Board of Health and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for informational purposes. 
(B)	Information to be submitted. Preliminary plats shall, at a minimum, show the following: 
(1)	Proposed subdivision name or identifying title;
(2)	Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided or his or her authorized agent, if any, and of the subdivider, if other than the owner of the land; 
(3)	Date, north point, scale and identification of land district and land lots;
(4)	Existing and proposed streets, utilities, easements, watercourses and structures on the tract; 
(5)	Lot and/or block numbers in consecutive order;
(6)	Total number of lots and acreage in proposed development;
(7)	Contours drawn at two-foot intervals or as may otherwise be approved by the Planning Commission; 
(8)	Any and all land located within a 25-year flood hazard area as defined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers; 
(9)	A sketch of the prospective future street system and utilities of the unsubmitted part when the preliminary plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holdings. 
(C)	Planning Commission review of preliminary plats. Before acting on the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission may request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the proposed development such as the District Highway Engineer, the County Engineer/County Road Department, West Central Georgia Regional Health Department, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, the Superintendent of Schools and public utility companies. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the requirements of these regulations and include comments on other factors affecting the public interest. The Planning Commission is responsible for securing the reports. 
(D)	Preliminary plat approval. 
(1)	Within 30 days after the time of submission of a preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall take action to approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove such preliminary plat. 
(2)	Should the Planning Commission fail to act on the proposed subdivision within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The applicant, however, may waive the provisions of this clause and consent to the extension of the period. 
(3)	If the Planning Commission disapproves or approves conditionally the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing and reference shall be made to the specific sections of the regulations with which the preliminary plat does not comply. Notification shall be prepared by the Planning Commission staff and forwarded to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.23 - Submission of construction plans. 
(A)	After obtaining approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider or his or her agent shall submit four black or blue line prints (or a number as specified by the County Engineer) of construction plans as outlined below to the County Engineer/County Road Department for his or her review. Sanitary sewer systems are under the jurisdiction of the West Central Georgia Regional Health District and plans shall be submitted to that Department as required by law or as is otherwise necessary to obtain final plat approval as required herein. 
(B)	Detailed construction plans shall be prepared by an engineer registered and licensed in the State of Georgia and shall be prepared in accordance with the design specification set forth in these regulations. 
(C)	Construction plans shall, at a minimum, consist of the following:
(1)	A topographic map drawn at two-foot intervals showing existing and proposed contours;
(2)	Layout plans and centerline profiles for each proposed street or street extension;
(3)	Layout and profiles of storm drain pipes and structures along with information on any adjacent property such as, but not limited to, topography and structures which might affect the design of the aforementioned utilities; 
(4)	Design specifications for any bridges or culverts which might be incorporated into the proposed subdivision; 
(5)	Design specifications for sanitary sewer systems as required by the West Central Georgia Regional Health District; 
(6)	Results and locations of percolation test for on-lot sewage systems;
(7)	Complete curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves. To include delta angle, radius, tangent and P.C. and P.T. stations for horizontal curves and length of curve, tangent grades, PVC and PVT stations for vertical curves; 
(8)	The minimum design speed used in computing curve data;
(9)	Layout plans and profiles of water supply and treatment facilities, water lines, fire hydrants and other structures along with information on any adjacent property such as, but not limited to, topography and structures which might affect the design of the aforementioned utilities. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.24 - Submission of final plat. 
(A)	Application. 
(1)	No street shall be accepted and maintained by Clay County, Georgia nor shall any permit be issued by any department in Clay County for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit unless and until a final plat prepared by a licensed and registered land surveyor or engineer of the State of Georgia has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
(2)	The subdivider or his or her agent shall acquire the signatures of the land surveyor or engineer, licensed and registered in the State of Georgia, the owner or his or her duly authorized agent of the tract to be subdivided, the County Engineer/County Road Department and, as required herein, the Public Health Inspector before submitting the final plat to the Planning Commission for its review. Three black or blue line prints of the final plat (or a number as specified by the Planning Commission) shall be submitted. 
(3)	The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat and shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time. 
(4)	The final plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch and shall be drawn on a sheet 18 inches by 24 inches in width, with a margin in one end of two inches for binding purposes and one-half-inch margin on the other three sides. If the final plat is drawn in two or more sections, it shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the sections and their relationship to one another. 
(B)	Information to be submitted. 
(1)	The final plat shall show the following information:
(a)	Name of the owner of the tract to be subdivided or his or her duly authorized agent;
(b)	Name of the subdivision;
(c)	North point, scale, date and legal land lots and land districts;
(d)	The names of all adjacent subdivisions and record owners of unsubdivided property adjoining the proposed subdivision; 
(e)	Block and lot numbers in consecutive order. Lots and blocks shall be numbered and continue, without duplication, throughout the subdivision; 
(f)	Total number of lots and acreage of the section being platted;
(g)	Lot lines and dimensions with accurate bearings;
(h)	Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot markers;
(i)	All areas to which title is reserved by owner;
(j)	The location of all watercourses, streams or creeks adjoining or within the proposed subdivision; 
(k)	Easements for utilities and limitations on such easements;
(l)	Names and accurate locations of all existing and proposed streets, water supply and treatment facilities and fire hydrants within or immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision; 
(m)	Accurate dimensions and bearings of all street lines;
(n)	Accurate distances and directions to the nearest street corner or official monument. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the plat; 
(o)	Complete data for all horizontal curves included in the plat, including radius, delta angle and tangent. 
(2)	All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
(C)	Final plat approval. 
(1)	Before acting on the final plat, the Planning Commission may request reports from any person or agency directly affected by the proposed development. At a minimum, the Planning Commission shall obtain from the County Engineer/County Road Department a signed statement that the proposed street names (except in the case of extension of existing streets) do not duplicate the names of streets now in existence. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from the approved preliminary plat and requirements of these regulations. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for securing said reports. 
(2)	Should the Planning Commission fail to act on the final plat within 30 days after its submission, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The applicant, however, may waive the provision of this clause and consent to the extension of said period. 
(3)	If the Planning Commission disapproves the final plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing and reference shall be made to the specific section of these regulations with which the plat does not comply. Notification shall be prepared by the Planning Commission and forwarded to the subdivider or his or her agent. 
(4)	The following certifications shall be shown on the final plat:
(a)	Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Clay County, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the Planning Commission on ____________/____________/____________, 20____________. This plat is approved for recording in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clay County, Georgia. 
Planning Commission 
(b)	Streets and storm drainage design, construction plans and easements meet the requirements of the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia, and are approved by the County Engineer/County Road Department of Clay County, Georgia on ____________/____________/____________, 20____________. 
By: 
County Engineer/County Road Department 
(c)	Certification, with seal, by a Land Surveyor or Engineer, licensed and registered in the State of Georgia to the effect that the survey and plat are correct and in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations and Plat Law. 
In my opinion, this is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared to conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of the law. 
On ____________/____________/____________, 20____________. 
By: ____________/____________/____________ 
Georgia Registration Number: ____________/____________/____________ 
(d)	Owner's Certification.
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey. 
Agent: ____________/____________/____________ Owner: ____________/____________/____________ 
Date: ____________/____________/____________ Date: ____________/____________/____________ 
(e)	Certificate of approval by the West Central Georgia Regional Health District (when on-site water supply or sewage disposal systems are to be utilized). 
Requirements for use of on-lot sewage disposal and/or water systems have been fulfilled. Each lot and system is subject to approval prior to development/ construction. 
By: ____________/____________/____________ Date: ____________/____________/____________ 
West Central Georgia Health District Inspector 
(f)	Certificate of approval by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and/or the West Central Georgia Regional Health District when a public water supply or sewage disposal system is to be utilized. 
By: ____________/____________/____________ Date: ____________/____________/____________ 
Georgia Department of Natural Resources/ West Central Georgia Health District Inspector 
(D)	Acceptance of improvements and requirements for performance and for certified check. 
(1)	Before the plat is signed by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, all applicants shall be required to complete all improvements as required by these regulations. 
(2)	If the subdivider does not wish to construct and install required public improvements as described herein prior to submitting the subdivision plat to the Planning Commission for final approval, a performance bond shall be required. Such bond shall be equal to the estimated cost of construction of the incomplete improvements. A certified check may be placed in escrow with Clay County in lieu of performance bonds. When construction has been completed and approved in accordance with the requirements herein, the Board of Commissioners shall release 95% of the funds in escrow with a letter of approval to the subdivider. The remaining 5% shall remain in escrow for a period of two years to cover compliance against failure. 
(3)	The performance bond shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the County Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. The period within which the required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not in any event exceed three years from date of final plat approval. 
(E)	Filing of final plat by Clerk of Superior Court. 
(1)	The final plat shall be properly signed and executed as required by these regulations before it is recorded by the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clay County, Georgia. 
(2)	Certificate of approval for recording on the final plat is as follows:
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Clay County, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given Final Approval by the Planning Commission on ____________, 20____________. This plat is approved for recording in the Office of the Superior Court of Clay County, Georgia. 
____________/____________/____________ 
Chairperson, Clay County Planning Commission 
____________/____________/____________ 
Secretary, Clay County Planning Commission 
(3)	When the approved plat has been recorded, copies of the plat (the amount of copies to be determined by the Planning Commission) with the restrictive covenants will be furnished to the Planning Commission staff for distribution to the appropriate departments of the county. 
(F)	Replat or resubdivision. The replatting or resubdivision of land shall follow the same procedures, rules and regulations as are required for the approval and recordation of a final plat. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 153.35 - General requirements. 
(A)	Suitability of the land. Land shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate a flood hazard. 
(B)	Conformity to map and plans. Subdivisions shall be in conformity with the existing and/or amended plans of the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners and the Georgia Department of Transportation and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and any other local, state or federal plans or regulations. 
(C)	Specifications for required improvements. All improvements, as are required herein, shall be constructed or installed to conform with design specifications of the county or any other agency of the state or federal government. 
(D)	Subdivision names. Subdivision names shall not duplicate or be confused with existing names. All subdivision name changes are subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.36 - Street layout. 
(A)	Conformity to mapped streets ordinance and transportation plan. The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with the Standard Roadway Specifications for Clay County. 
(B)	Continuation of adjoining street system. The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area, with the topography, with such natural features as streams and tree growth, with public convenience and safety and with the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(C)	Access to adjacent properties. 
(1)	Where, in the opinion of the county, it is desirable to provide for street access to an adjoining property, proposed roadways shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and joined with the existing roadways where such exists or with other proposed roadways. Where no roadway exists or where the adjoining property is in alignment with a proposed roadway, a temporary turnaround shall be provided at the boundary of said property. 
(2)	In the event adjacent properties are separated by a watercourse or stream and where the adjoining property line runs to a centerline of the stream or watercourse, the County Engineer/County Road Department shall require that street access to adjoining property be provided. The first subdivider shall construct the streets to the edge of the stream or watercourse and shall provide sufficient bond or escrow account to adequately cover one-half the estimated cost of the proposed public crossing facility. Such bond or escrow account shall be held by Clay County for a period not to exceed two years. If after such period, work has not commenced on the second subdivision, such funds shall be returned to the first subdivider. The second developer shall be responsible for completing the crossing (with the bond or escrow funds if work is initiated within the two year period). 
(3)	Where subdivisions are developed abutting existing, dedicated or platted streets whose rights-of-way are inadequate, the developer shall make available to Clay County at fair market value the additional rights-of-way necessary to meet the minimum standards of these regulations. The necessary additional rights-of-way width shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats. 
(D)	Discouragement of through traffic. Subdivisions shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic on local streets. However, the provision for the extension and continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining areas is required. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission shall require marginal access streets, single tier lots or such other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with the arterial street and separation of local and through traffic. 
(E)	Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets, reserve strips or access easements platted in any subdivision. 
(F)	Street names. 
(1)	Proposed streets which are extensions of, or in alignment with, existing or other proposed streets shall bear the same name. In no case shall the name of the proposed street duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the suffix (street, boulevard, drive, place, court and the like). 
(2)	All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Clay County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.37 - Street design standards. 
The design standards which shall apply to roadways are as follows: 
(A)	Right-of-way widths. Minimum right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Arterial: 120 feet;
(2)	Collector: 80 feet;
(3)	Subdivision: 60 feet.
(B)	Pavement widths. Pavement widths shall be not less than the following: 
(1)	Arterial w/curb and gutter: 53 feet;
w/out curb and gutter: 24 feet (w/12-foot shoulder); 
(2)	Collector w/curb and gutter: 45 feet;
w/out curb and gutter: 24 feet (w/10-foot shoulder); 
(3)	Subdivision streets w/curb and gutter: 33 feet;
w/out curb and gutter: 24 feet (w/10-foot shoulder); 
(4)	Base thickness: 5 inches minimum residential, all others by design;
(5)	Pavement thickness: 2 inch-minimum residential, all others by design.
(C)	Grades. 
(1)	Roadway grades shall not be more than 12% nor less than 0.5%, unless approved by the county. 
(2)	Grades approaching intersections may not exceed 8% for a distance of not less than 100 feet from the centerline of the intersection unless otherwise approved by the county. 
(D)	Horizontal curves. Where a centerline deflection angle of more than five degrees occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than the following: 
(1)	Arterial roadways: 500 feet;
(2)	Collector roadways: 350 feet;
(3)	Subdivision roads: 150 feet.
(E)	Vertical curves. All vertical curves shall have such length as necessary to provide safe stopping sight distance. The stopping sight distance shall be specified as a line of sight measured along the centerline from a point 3.75 feet above the surface of the pavement to a fixed object six inches in height. The following distance shall apply. 

 
(F)	Tangents. There shall be a tangent of at least 100 feet between reverse curves, unless otherwise approved by the county. 
(G)	Intersections. 
(1)	Roadways shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no streets intersect at less than 60 degrees. 
(2)	Intersections with arterial roadways shall be at least 800 feet apart measured from centerline to centerline. 
(3)	Street jogs shall not be less than 125 feet measured from centerline to centerline.
(4)	Proper sight lines shall be provided and maintained at all intersections. Measured along the centerline, 3.75 feet above grade, there shall be a clear sight distance triangle of 300 feet on major arterials, 200 feet on collector roadways and 100 feet on subdivision roadways, measured from a point of the centerlines intersection. 
(H)	Temporary turn-around. A temporary turn-around, 40 feet in radius, shall be where the logical extension of a subdivision roadway is terminated. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.38 - Blocks. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(A)	Blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 400 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances; 
(B)	Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where abutting upon major streets, limited access highways or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impractical. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.39 - Lots. 
(A)	Lot sizes. Residential lots shall meet the area requirements necessary for adequate sewer treatment and water availability and for compliance with the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, O.C.G.A. § 290-5-26, the intent of the Clay County Comprehensive Plan and the rules and regulations of the West Central Georgia Health District. Depending on the results of soil percolation tests, topography or other limiting conditions, the size of lots required may change. The subdivider or his or her agent shall consult with the West Central Georgia Health District after performing a percolation test for each proposed lot and before establishing a lot size and designing a subdivision for any area within Clay County. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to use as intended and to meet local requirements. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(B)	Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut a dedicated public street by at least 50 feet. Each lot shall meet the minimum driveway sight distance requirements of the Geometric Design Standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(C)	Lot width. Lot width shall not be less than minimum road frontage required by this chapter and shall not narrow between the right-of-way and building line. 
(D)	Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(E)	Building lines. All building lines shall meet the setback requirements established in the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, O.C.G.A. § 290-5-26. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.40 - Easements. 
Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows: 
(A)	When the county deems it necessary, utility easements shall be provided. All easements shall be a minimum of 60 feet in width. All easements accepted by the county for utility construction shall be cleared, grubbed and graded by the subdivision developer; 
(B)	Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural or manmade watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream or a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourses, drainageway, channel or stream shall be provided as determined by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.41 - Buffer strips. 
In addition to meeting the minimum lot requirements specified in the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, O.C.G.A. Ch. 290-5-26, all lots adjacent to railroads, limited access highways, major arterials, commercial and industrial development and airport facilities shall be provided with a minimum 20-foot wide buffer strip on the side adjacent to the aforementioned items unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. Within the buffer strip, the building of structures is prohibited. Unless it can be demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt that existing trees and shrubs are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the potential resident, the removal of trees and shrubs in this area is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.42 - Storm drainage. 
(A)	Storm drainage shall be designed for 25-year return frequency storms.
(B)	Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, sewers, catch basis, culverts and other facilities as required by standards and specifications of the county. 
(C)	Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual unobstructed easement of appropriate width. 
(D)	Use of catch basins at road intersections are specified and shall be arranged in such a manner that will not permit water to cross intersections. Unless otherwise specified by the county, cross drainage of roadways or intersections via valley gutter is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.43 - Water supply. 
(A)	When, in the written opinion of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources through the local Health Department, public water supply is within a reasonable distance, the subdivider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connect to such supply. The installation shall be prior to the paving of the street. The public water supply shall be installed by the developer adhering to all state and local permit requirements at the developer's cost. 
(B)	Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system acceptable to and approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources through the local Health Department. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.44 - Inspection during construction. 
The contractor shall provide all testing designated by the county. All construction performed under the auspices of these regulations shall be subject to inspection by the county. The contractor shall be responsible for notifying the county in writing prior to commencement of any such work. If the contractor fails to make this notification, he or she shall then be responsible for the expense of any operation or laboratory testing by the county to ascertain compliance with specifications. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.45 - Acceptance of improvements. 
The county shall have the authority to reject any material or work which does not meet the requirements or specifications adopted by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.46 - Guarantee of work. 
The developer shall guarantee all work performed by him or her or his or her agent against failure for a period of two years after completion of work. To insure compliance with the above, a maintenance bond in an amount determined by the county shall be placed. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.47 - Additional requirement. 
The subdivision developer shall be required to secure necessary permits for connecting new subdivision construction to exiting federal, state and county highways. The developer will construct all approaches, acceleration/deceleration lanes, drainage and pavement in accordance with approved plans and permits. The developer will be required to provide the county with a letter of approval of the connection to an existing highway. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.48 - Construction specifications. 
After the effective date of these regulations, the county will not accept any dedicated improvements until the improvements have been completed by the subdivider of the subdivision in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 153.60 - General. 
These rules and regulations shall be administered by the Planning Commission of Clay County/City of Fort Gaines/City of Bluffton, Georgia. The Commission may from time to time issue instructions and operating procedures to be followed in the administration of these regulations to the end that the public may be informed and the approval of the plats may be expedited. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.61 - Exceptions. 
(A)	Construction design standards. Where the County Engineer/County Road Department finds that due to particular circumstances, existing standards and specifications of the county are inappropriate, he or she may waive such requirements subject to specifying in writing other similar requirements that are not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property owners. 
(B)	Substandard lot subdivisions. In areas developed prior to the enactment of the subdivision regulations of Clay County, Georgia, dwelling units were constructed on what would now be substandard lots when subdivided. In situations where a resubdivision of land is required in order to sell existing dwelling units, such lots are exempted from the lot size requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.62 - Variances. 
(A)	Where the Board of Commissioners finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alterative proposal, it may approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the Planning Commission shall not recommend a variance unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property; 
(2)	The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)	Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out; 
(4)	The variances will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, O.C.G.A. Ch. 290-5-26, this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map. 
(B)	In approving variances, the Board of Commissioners may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.63 - Amendments. 
(A)	These regulations may be amended from time to time by the County Commission Chairperson and members of the Board of Commissioners, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendations. The Planning Commission shall have 45 days within which to submit its report. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the 45-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the amendment. 
(B)	Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the Planning Commission, acting for the county, shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15-days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper deemed as the official organ for legal notices for Clay County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.64 - Appeals. 
In the event a subdivider desires to appeal any final decision made by the Planning Commission under these subdivision regulations, the subdivider shall first present his or her appeal to the Board of Commissioners of Clay County who shall hold a hearing on the decision of the Planning Commission. Any further appeals shall be as provided by law after the aforesaid procedure has been followed. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Sec. 153.65 - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance, resolution or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance or resolution requiring the highest or more strict standard shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994)
Chapter 154 - ZONING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 154.001 - Title and objectives. 
This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Clay County, Georgia, for the purpose of setting forth standards and permissible uses designated to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of Clay County; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, public and private sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements by regulating the uses of the land. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of Clay County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.002 - Legislative authority. 
Whereas, counties of the State of Georgia are authorized by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4, and O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-1 et seq. to exercise the powers of planning and zoning; and it has been determined by the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia that it is necessary and desirable to adopt zoning regulations under the authority of the above cited constitutional and statutory provisions. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.003 - Method of regulation. 
Now therefore be it resolved that the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia, as authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia has created a planning commission known as the Clay County Planning Commission and does adopt zoning regulations for the following purposes: to define certain words used therein; to create zone boundaries; to regulate the location of trades, professions, businesses and industries; to regulate the density in distribution of population; to provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures; to define and limit the powers and duties of the Planning Commission; to provide a method for administration, amendment and enforcement; to provide for the imposition of penalties for violations; repeal conflicting ordinances and resolutions; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.004 - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall govern the use of all land and development therein and within the unincorporated limits of Clay County, Georgia in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-2. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.005 - Word usage. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein are interpreted as follows. 
(A)	Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. 
(B)	The word "shall" is always mandatory.
(C)	The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(D)	The word "lot" includes the words plot or parcel.
(E)	The word "building" includes the word structure.
(F)	The words "used" and "occupied," as applied to any land or buildings, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(G)	The words "map" and zoning map" means the Official Zoning Map of Clay County.
(H)	The words "governing body" refer to the Clay County Board of Commissioners.
(I)	The words "Planning Commission" refer to the Clay County Planning Commission.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.006 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
Accessory building or use. A subordinate building or use customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the main building or use, such as a garage, workshop and the like. An accessory use shall not include any uses injurious or offensive to the neighborhood. 
Agriculture or agricultural. The bona fide use of a parcel of land of five acres or more for the cultivation of land, raising of poultry or livestock or similar agrarian activity (to include tree farms) for gain or profit and the related buildings, structures and appurtenances necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities. 
Airfield. Any area of land or water utilized for the landing and taking off of aircraft. 
Airport. Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the public interest for such purposes. An airport shall include all runways, terminal buildings, hangers and related facilities located on the airport premises. 
Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Apartment building. A multi-family dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership designed for use by four or more housekeeping units living independently of each other and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
Aquifer. Any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a dug well. 
Automobile sales lot. An open premises arranged, designed or used for storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of trailer. 
Bed and breakfast. A dwelling unit in which room(s) or lodging unit (or units) and continental breakfast service only is provided to guest clients, for lengths of stay ranging from one night to seasonal, by owner of the principal structure. 
Boarding house. A dwelling in which lodging and meals are furnished for consideration for four or more but not exceeding nine guests. Such dwelling shall contain no more than five guest rooms. 
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or property of any kind, including tents or awnings used for purposes of a building. 
Building line. A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall not project. 
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the structure is situated. 
Buffer. A buffer is a strip of land which separates two or more zoning districts by the use of shrubs and trees which will form an opaque barrier of a prescribed width and be at least six feet in height within three years of planting. 
Care home. A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated on a profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or care for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. The term "care home" shall include the term "extended care facility," as defined by Georgia law. 
Caretaker or employee residence. An accessory residence (including mobile homes) placed on an occupied tract for use by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself or herself. 
Church, club or lodge. Building in which organized religious, fraternal, social or educational meetings are conducted on a regular non-profit basis. Fraternal organizations must show that they have received recognition and sanction from a parent group or organization. A private club must show that its membership is limited by either: 
(1)	The use and operation of an amateur athletic facility, including but not limited to golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges and/or swimming pools; or 
(2)	Residency in a particular subdivision, condominium, apartment project or other residential development. 
Commercial outdoor recreation development (CORD). A development of at least five acres or more that is a commercial enterprise that encompasses active and/or passive outdoor recreational activities. A CORD District may be located in any zoning district with prior approval by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
Comprehensive plan. A composite of the joint Clay County/Cities of Fort Gaines and Bluffton Comprehensive Plan, all accompanying maps, charts and explanatory materials, together with all amendments thereto, adopted by the Clay County Planning Committee and the Clay County Board of Commissioners, as well as each municipal government. 
Conditional use. Is a use which is not automatically permitted inherently but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this regulation or required by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. Public notification procedures described in § 154.131 shall be followed for all conditional use permits. 
Condominium. A building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his or her unit and joint ownership in common grounds. 
Day care center. An establishment which provides care and education for six or more children from infancy, opened for the major portion of the day or night and in which meals are served. 
District. Any section or sections of the county for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform. 
Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer on the outside and/or inside of the principal building. The term "drive-in" includes drive-in restaurants and dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and/or car washes. 
Duplex. Two dwelling units, each of which is attached side to side, each one sharing only one common wall with the other; also referred to as duplex when placed on a single lot or a townhouse when each is on a lot. 
Dwelling attached. Three or more adjoining dwelling units, each of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls from ground to roof; also referred to as a townhouse. 
Dwelling, multi-family. A dwelling unit contained in a building composed of three or more dwelling units. Also referred to as an apartment. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for occupancy by not more than one family for living purposes and having cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. 
Easement. A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his or her land for road right-of-way or other specified purposes. 
Equestrian center. A tract of land of 25 acres or more on which more than four adult horses are kept for the purpose of training, boarding, sale or breeding or where instruction pertaining to the same is given for a fee. For the purposes of this chapter, this term also included facilities for riding trails and rings, shows, competitive equestrian events and riding lessons. 
Family. One or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, and including foster children (as that term is defined under Georgia law) no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises or in an accessory building. 
Farm. A parcel of land 25 acres or more on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as specified in agricultural. 
Flea market. A building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside and rented or otherwise provided and which is intended for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that are either homemade, homegrown, hand-crafted, old, obsolete or antique and may include the selling of goods at retail by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade. 
Floating zone. A zoning technique under which the county adopts a zoning district in the text of the zoning ordinance but is not placed on the Official Zoning Map. The county reserves the mapping decision until a developer makes an application to have the floating zone applied to his or her property. Each floating zone will have density and site development standards. 
Floodplain. Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine floodplains are those areas contiguous with a lake, stream or stream bed whose elevation is greater than the normal flowing water or water pool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year (1% annual probability) flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains are floodplains not associated with a stream system but which are low points to which surrounding lands drain. 
Garage, repair. Building and premises designed or used for the purpose of service and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles, provided that the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings, and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. 
Garage sale (includesyard sale, rummage sale). The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district, whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school athletic events shall not be deemed to constitute a garage sale. 
Groundwater recharge area. The land area where the water that eventually seeps down into an aquifer first enters the ground as mapped on the Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Area of Georgia and the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map. 
Group home. A dwelling unit which is used to provide assisted community living for persons with physical, mental, emotional, familiar or social difficulties. A group home must comply with all state and federal regulations applying to such facilities. 
Governmental landfills and/or waste disposal facilities. Any landfill or other type waste disposal facility to include, but not be limited to, an incinerator, which is owned or operated by any county, municipality or other governmental agency, entity or authority not located within the corporate limits of Clay County, Georgia. 
Hazardous waste. Any waste product which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. 261.3. 
Hazardous waste disposal facility. All structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land used for treating, storing or disposing of hazardous waste, including all operations or storage areas, diked overflow or emergency spillway areas. A hazardous waste disposal facility may consist of several treatment, storage or disposal operational units; it includes all areas where hazardous waste may be received, stored, handled or processed. 
Home occupation. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no more than three nonresidents and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There is no access by the public. A HOME OCCUPATION is designed to be less restrictive than a home office but more restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. 
Home office. An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and no other individual, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The office may be for the purpose of service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, real estate salespersons or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. There will be no changes which would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office will be restricted to no more than two rooms of the dwelling and cannot exceed more than 600 square feet in area. Such office uses shall be limited to routine office clerical or bookkeeping procedures which can be conducted within a residence. Home office shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises. HOME OFFICES shall also include any business requiring access by the public, including, but not limited to customers, clients or vendors. No outside storage or display, including signs, is permitted and no one other than family members who reside on the premises may be employed in the office. 
Hospitals. Any institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical care, including those wherein mentally retarded, mentally disturbed, epileptic, alcoholic, drug addicted, chronically ill and physically handicapped patients are treated or cared for. 
Hotel. Any building containing principally sleeping rooms in which transient guests are lodged, with or without meals, with no provision made for cooking in any individual room or suite. For structural and safety purposes, such buildings must conform to state laws regulating hotels. 
Industrial park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a Comprehensive Development Plan in a manner that provides a park-like setting for industrial establishments. 
Industrialized building. Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly an installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof and bearing the approved insignia of the Commissioner of Community Affairs, Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Junkyard. The use of any space whether inside or outside a building for the storage, keeping, salvage and/or sale of junk, scrap metals or other scrap materials, including dismantling, demolition or abandonment of one or more automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Kennel, commercial. Any place in or at which more than four adult dogs (or cats) are kept for the purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding or training and for which any fee is charged. 
Laboratory. An establishment or premises where scientific services are provided, including testing or analysis of medical, chemical, physical, mechanical, electric or electronic nature or the calibration of instruments. 
Land application waste disposal facilities. Any facility at which pollutants are applied to the surface or beneath the surface of a parcel of land and which creates the opportunity for such pollutants to percolate, infiltrate or be absorbed into soil and/or into the waters of Clay County, Georgia. 
Lot. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer or ownership or lease to or separate use of another or for development. The word "lot" includes, but is not limited to, the words plot or parcel. 
Lot area. The horizontal area contained within the boundary lines of a lot. 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot frontage. Lot width measured at the street lot line(s), being the length of the property line of any one premises along each legally accessible public right-of-way it borders. 
Lot line. A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another or from a street or any other public or private space. 
Lot line, front. That lot line along which the lot takes primary access to a street. 
Lot line, rear. That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of a lot or, in the case of an irregular lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from, the front lot line. 
Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record. Any validly recorded lot which at the time of its recordation complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured parallel to the front and rear lot lines at the building line. In the case of only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such lot line and the opposite lot line or future right-of-way line. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes are constructed to the Federal Manufacture Home Construction Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular home. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrial Building Act or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended. 
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms and having a separate outside entrance for each guest room. To be used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as auto court and motor lodge but not boarding house, as defined in this section. 
Nonconforming use. Any building, structure or use of land which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this chapter and which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Occupy. To use land or buildings for any length or time for a purpose for which the land or a building or part thereof is used or is intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy" shall be encompassed by this definition. 
Park, community. A parcel of land owned by a unit of government or a private organization used or intended to be used for recreational or leisure time activities. Such parks may include food and/or recreational sales and accessory uses. 
Planned unit development (PUD). A large, unified development of ten acres or more adhering to a comprehensive development plan and located on a single tract of land, or on two or more tracts of land which may be separated only by a street or other right-of-way, whose approval would serve to implement the plans of Clay County (see § 154.059). 
Plat. A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land, including lot lines, street rights-of-way and easements with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon. 
Plat development. A preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its workability and conformation to the design requirements of the subdivision regulations in all aspects but is not final in form for recording and the details are not completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to any development. 
Plat, final. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary. The streets shown on the plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission and the Clay County Board of Commissioners prior to recording. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map(s). Maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Public utility or utilities. A service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
Public way. A street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat and/or prescription. 
Residence. A building containing only dwelling units and which meets all the applicable requirements of the Standard Building Code for conventional construction. The term "residence" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, boarding house, rooming house, motel or other accommodations used for transient occupancy and shall not for the purpose of this chapter include mobile home, manufactured home or modular home. 
Residential business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no more than five nonresidents and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The business may require access by the public. The residential business is designed to be less restrictive than a home office or home occupation but more restrictive than a rural business in regard to access by the public, size visibility, number of employees and types of business. 
Restaurant. An establishment however designated at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, park or marina operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
Right-of-way. Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Right-of-way line. The outside boundary of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, recorded easement, deed, dedication or by the official right-of-way map of Clay County. 
Road. See definition of Street, highway, road. 
Rural business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, an accessory structure or outside and which is carried on by a resident of that property and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential dwelling purposes. The rural business is designed to be less restrictive than the home office, home occupation or residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. 
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to extend under the provisions of this chapter establishing minimum depth and widths of yard. 
Sewage sludge (biosolids) land application and disposal facilities. Any tract of land or facility at which solid, semisolid or liquid residue generated during the treatment of domestic sewage, industrial wastewater or a combination of domestic sewage and industrial wastewater is sprayed, deposited, spread, injected or applied upon or beneath the land's surface or otherwise applied to land. Sewage sludge includes, but is not limited to, scum or solids removed in primary, secondary or advanced wastewater treated processes conducted by any governmental or private wastewater treatment facility. 
Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed and owned or managed as a unit with on-site parking and of similar architectural characteristics. 
Sign, off-premises. Any outdoor sign, notice or advertising device used to advertise, announce or promote a business, professional, commercial or industrial enterprise or undertaking which is located and which is operated at a site other than the premises upon which the sign is located. Such signs shall be permitted upon a standard sign and then only in zones in which such are allowed by this chapter. 
Sign, on-premises. Any outdoor sign, notice or advertising device used primarily to direct attention to a business, professional, commercial or industrial enterprise or undertaking being conducted upon the premises on which such sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed 200 square feet per sign face. 
Sign, public or semi-public directional, off-premises. A sign which directs attention to a public or semi-public activity, such as a school, church, fraternal organization or the like. Such signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area. 
Sign, standard. A sign which does not exceed five feet in face height and is no more than ten feet in face width, supported by metal tubing posts of the type specified by the latest edition of the Standard Building Code or other approval material. Any such sign shall be constructed with 20-gauge sheet metal, wood or plastic, painted on each side, the trim of which may be of treated wood. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas. Areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contracts, geologic structure, presence of karst topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks) and potentiometric surfaces. 
Slow rate land treatment system. A system for wastewater treatment by spray irrigation (land application). The term refers to the advanced treatment of wastewater by irrigation onto support vegetative growth. When properly sited, designed and operated as defined by state and local regulations, there is no direct discharge to surfaced waters. The irrigated wastewater evaporates and transpires to the atmosphere or enters the groundwater through percolation. Organic constituents in the wastewater are stabilized by soil bacteria, lost to the atmosphere through denitrification and leached into the groundwater. Phosphorus and other constituents are absorbed in the soil profile and taken up by plants. Properly sited, designed and operated irrigation systems produce a percolate water of high quality and thus protect ground and surface water resources. For purposes of this chapter, the use may include ponds (lagoons) for the temporary storage of the treated wastewater before application to the spray fields. The treated wastewater stored in the lagoons must have been treated to a level that could be sprayed without further treatment. These ponds shall have liners to prevent seepage. This land use is permitted only with the approval of the Clay County Board of Commissioners after a recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
Steep slopes. All land that has a slope of 20% or greater for at least 500 feet apart as shown on a United States Geologic Survey (USGS) Quadrangle Map. 
Street. A public or dedicated thoroughfare or a private right-of-way or easement shown on a recorded plat and which has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
Street, centerline. That line surveyed and monumented or accepted by Clay County as the centerline of the street; or in the event no centerline has been so determined, that line running midway between and generally parallel to the direction of the outside right-of-way lines of the street. 
Street, connector. A street supplementary to the major state and U.S. highway systems running throughout the country and primarily a means of interconnectivity between this system and smaller areas. 
Street, cul-de-sac. A short street designed to have one end permanently closed. The closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Street, dead-end. A street having no outlet at one end. 
Street, highway, road. A road or street that forms a part of the existing or projected Federal Aid Highway System or the State or County Highway System. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, to include, among other things, buildings, towers, monuments and statues; but not to include telephone and other utilities, poles, overhead wires, retaining walls and terrace walls, wire fences and any other thing less than three feet in height. 
Subdivision. Division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, rent or building development, including all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. The term "subdivision" does not apply to the division of land into parcels of five or more where no new street is involved. All subdivisions are to be divided and developed in accordance with the subdivision regulations of Clay County, Georgia. 
Townhouse. Residential structures containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having common or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors and the units shall have one or two floors but without access between adjoining units. 
Travel trailer. A vehicular portable structure not over eight feet by 35 feet and designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses which may or may not have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities, but if such facilities are included, a sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required. Any vehicle designed or converted to a design with plumbing connections for attachment to outside sewage systems shall not be included in this definition. 
Travel trailer park. A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents or other camping units for temporary occupancy of not over 60-days' duration. 
Use. The specific purpose for which the land or building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
Use, principal. The primary purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
Use temporary. Any use established, for a fixed period of time, without construction or alteration of a permanent structure, with the intent to discontinue such use upon expiration of such time. 
Variance. A modification of the strict terms of zoning regulation granted by the Clay County Planning Commission where such modifcation will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted which shall authorize a land use not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
Vehicle. Any device or contrivance for carrying or conveying persons or objects, the device being designed to be self-propelled by its own motor or power. 
Water system, community. A potable water supply and treatment system other than an individual public water system serving more than one building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. The system is one which is owned by a person or legal unit other than a unit of government. 
Water system, individual. A potable water system other than a community or public water system serving a single building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
Water system, public. A potable water supply and treatment system other than individual or community water systems owned by a unit of government. 
Wetland. An area of one acre or more where standing water is retained for a portion of the year and unique vegetation has adapted to the area; as mapped by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Wireless communications. Any personal wireless service as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless communications services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), private mobile radio (PRMR) paging and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
Wireless communication tower. A structured designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guy-wire support tower and other similar structures. Tower structures shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of three antenna arrays. 
Yard. A required open space on the same lot with a principal building and which is unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the sky, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front. The full width of the lot between the street right-of-way and the front building line. 
Yard, rear. The full width of the lot between the rear line of the lot and the rear building line. 
Yard, side. The space between the building and the side line of the lot exclusive of front and rear yard. 
Zoning condition. Any stipulation made by the County Commission as a zoning decision affecting property which imposes a requirement on the use or development of property which is different from the use or development regulations set forth in the zoning district to which the property is being rezoned. By way of example, but not as a limitation, such zoning conditions may relate to the use, density, construction materials, architectural style and design, location of structures and buffer area. 
Zoning decision. Final action by the Clay County Board of Commissioners which result in: 
(1)	The adoption of a zoning ordinance;
(2)	The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; 
(3)	The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning district to another; or 
(4)	The approval of a conditional use.
Zoning official. The official or other designated authority charged by the Clay County Board of Commissioners with administration and enforcement of this chapter or his or her duly appointed representative. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 154.020 - District designations. 
(A)	Clay County, Georgia is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
A-1 General Agriculture and Forestry District 
R-R Rural Residential 
R-1 Residential 
C-1 Commercial District 
I-1 Industrial District 
(B)	In addition, the following designations will be utilized as floating zones:
CORD Commercial Outdoor Recreation District 
MHU-1 Manufactured Housing Unit District-Parks 
PUD Planned Unit Development 
(C)	Overlay zones:
Natural Resource Conservation 
Wetland Protection 
Groundwater Recharge Protection Area 
River Corridor Protection Plan 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.021 - Official zoning maps. 
The boundaries of these districts are established as shown in the map entitled The Zoning Map of Clay County, Georgia. The map shall also be identified by the signature of the Clerk and the Board of Commissioners and the date and adoption of this chapter. The Zoning Map and all explanatory matters thereon are adopted and made a part of this chapter. The documents are made a public record and shall be kept in the office of the County Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.022 - Map amendments. 
(A)	In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes may be made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed on the Official Zoning Map by the official action of the Board of Commissioners. Such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map promptly, together with a numerical entry on the Official Zoning Map referring to the application and other records on file which state the date of the official action and description of the nature of the changes. 
(B)	No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map or matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and is punishable as provided by law in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.023 - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Unless otherwise specified, district boundary lines shall be property or lot lines, the center lines of streets, or such lines extended, a line midway between the main tracks of the railroad, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way or the county line of Clay County, Georgia. Such lines drawn or to appear on these lines are to be considered thereon. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of adoption of this chapter, the Planning Commission may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.024 - Conformity. 
No building or land shall be used or occupied except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter herein specified for the district in which it is located from the date of the enactment of this chapter. No owner of any lot located within this county shall subdivide said lot such that remaining lots would have an area less than that required under the applicable zoning district requirements. (See §§ 154.075 et seq.) 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 3. - ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 154.035 - General. 
The following sections define the purpose and intent of the zoning districts established by this chapter. Uses specified in this section are simply examples. Specific uses allowed in each district are defined in §§ 154.055 et seq. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.036 - A-1 General Agriculture and Forestry District. 
(A)	The Agricultural District is established to maintain those areas with land characteristics, such as soil moisture, temperature and content suitable for farming, dairying, forestry operations and other agricultural activities; to protect land used or needed for food production and other agricultural uses from encroachment by untimely and unplanned residential, commercial or industrial development; to permit the continuation of agricultural uses in areas where development is anticipated, but where the present application of zoning controls for future, more intensive uses would be unreasonable and premature; to prevent the subdivision of land for residential development that requires public services such as paved roads, water and sanitary sewer; and to preserve the rural, open space character of certain areas. 
(B)	No new A-1 Agriculture and Forestry District may be created which contains less than 25 acres. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.037 - Rural Residential District. 
The Rural Residential District is composed of open land areas and forest lands located on non-prime agricultural soils where a more intensive use of land is unlikely to occur in the near future. This district is intended to preserve lands best suited for large parcel residential uses and preserve land stilted to the eventual economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities, schools and other facilities in the development of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.038 - R-1 Residential District. 
The Residential District is established for more concentrated medium-to-higher density residential areas of the county, specifically those in the vicinity of Lake Walter F. George and the City of Fort Gaines. These areas are intended to be geographically defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to a residential environment. Certain nonresidential uses that are more compatible with residential uses may be permitted on review of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.039 - C-1 Commercial District. 
The Commercial District is established to provide suitable areas for a broad range of retail, wholesale and service uses. General compatibility with abutting different uses is required; this may be achieved through buffering, screening and/or development plan review. Development in this district should be located on major thoroughfares (highways), arterial streets or collector streets and the associated street network. The location and development of commercial activities shall be encouraged so as to minimize traffic hazards and interference with adjacent uses. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.040 - I-1 Industrial District. 
(A)	The Industrial District is established to provide areas for the development of industrial and assembly plants and their related activities. It is also the intent of this District that noise, odor, dust and glare associated with uses permitted in this District be confined as much as possible. It is also the intent of this District that traffic generated by uses permitted, including raw materials, finished products and employees be minimal but that transportation facilities and routes be easily accessible. Development in these Districts should be served by sanitary sewer or have provision for on-site disposal. 
(B)	No new I-1 Industrial Districts may be created which contain less than five acres.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.041 - CORD Commercial Outdoor Recreation Development District. 
This district is a floating zone. The CORD District is established to provide areas for commercial recreational facilities and activities. This does not include seasonal hunting rights between consenting parties. CORDS may be located in any district subject to approval by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.042 - MHU-1 Manufactured Housing Unit District-Parks. 
The Manufactured Housing Unit District-Parks is established to provide areas within the county for the placement of manufactured housing units in parks which are designed for the placement of manufactured housing units. The specific intent of this District is to require adequate space and facilities for healthful living conditions; to require all such Districts to have access to a major arterial county road for easy accessibility; to insure suitable water and sewer facilities are provided according to health regulations and statutes of the State of Georgia and the County Commission; and to encourage the development of manufactured home parks for long term residential use rather than transient travel trailer use. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.043 - PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
Planned Unit Development District is a method of development which permits a tract of land to be developed as one lot, rather than separate lots. The technique is used to encourage coordinated development; to permit higher densities in conjunction with functional open space; and to promote efficient use of existing natural landscape features and to be developed in compliance with an approved development plan. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 4. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 154.055 - Uses permitted. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected and no existing building or structure or any part thereof shall be reconstructed or moved, nor shall any land, structure or building be used or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.056 - Conditional uses permitted in all districts with review. 
There shall be permitted in all districts the following conditional uses only after site plan review by the Planning Commission, specifics for which include the submission of an overall development scheme stating the development intentions of the landowner, including but not limited to the following: a statement of location and intensity of proposed use(s) and activity(ies), a physical description of proposed facilities accommodating such uses and a general location of public utilities: 
(A)	Public buildings of a government nature, including libraries;
(B)	Public utilities, not otherwise specified, including power and gas substations, communication systems and pumping stations; 
(C)	Customary home occupations/offices;
(D)	Semi-public buildings and uses, including private schools and churches;
(E)	Public and private school buildings and associated uses, vocational schools, research and training facilities; 
(F)	Public recreational facilities, including parks, playgrounds, stadiums and the like;
(G)	General hospitals, including nursing homes, group homes and personal care homes;
(H)	Day care centers, nurseries and kindergartens.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.057 - District regulations. 
The following contains specific regulations for each district, including uses permitted, uses prohibited, required lot area, density limitations, setbacks and height limitations. All lands, buildings and structures shall be developed in accordance with the zoning district regulations and use regulations applicable to the zoning district in which such land, buildings and structures are located. Any development of land not in accordance with that permitted under this chapter shall be prohibited. 

 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.058 - Detailed regulations for MHU-1 Park. 
(A)	Minimum park requirements.
(1)	Area. Three acres and ten spaces available for immediate occupancy; 7,500 square feet of land area for each manufactured housing unit to be placed. 
(2)	Yards. Front, 50 feet; rear and side, 25 feet.
(3)	Height. Maximum one story or 15 feet.
(4)	Open space. One hundred fifty square feet of park and recreation area per mobile home space. 
(5)	Space width. Forty feet minimum.
(6)	Space front yard. Ten feet minimum.
(7)	Space side yard. Twenty feet between manufactured housing units.
(8)	Space rear yard. Twenty-five feet minimum.
(9)	Parking. Two spaces for each manufactured housing unit.
(B)	Other requirements.
(1)	Survey site plan required shall include the following: name and address of owner; vicinity map; with a minimum scale of one inch = 100 feet; north arrow; numbered lots; lot numbers; size of lots; street layout; trash container location(s); location of all utilities, including sewage, unless originally approved with site plans, no accessory building or additions to manufactured housing units allowed. 
(2)	Access roads within manufactured housing unit parks shall not be less than 20 feet in width and shall be paved with a hard surface treatment. 
(3)	There shall be established and maintained guest parking facilities at a ratio of one space per three manufactured housing unit spaces. If access roads are paved to a width of 32 feet, guest off-street parking spaces shall not be required. 
(4)	Each manufactured housing unit space shall be equipped with a pad ten feet wide for a single-wide, 20 feet wide for a double-wide by 45 feet long of six inches of compacted gravel or other similar material. 
(5)	Each manufactured housing unit space shall be furnished with connections to water, sewer or septic (tank) and electricity utilities; all will be approved by the appropriate department/agency. 
(6)	Manufactured housing units may not be used for nonresidential use within the manufactured housing unit park except for the manufactured housing unit park office. 
(7)	Standards for manufactured housing units shall also apply to the latest edition of the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) One- and Two-Family Dwellings (Code). 
(8)	No owner of a manufactured housing park shall allow a manufactured housing unit to locate or relocate within the park without a location placement permit from the County Inspector's office and proof of tax paid. 
(9)	An approved trash container(s), to be compatible with Clay County's sanitation service, shall be located within 150 feet of any manufactured housing unit park and shall be screened by a solid opaque fence of adequate height to screen from view any material in the container. Such trash containers shall be provided by the manufactured housing unit park owner/operator. 
(10)	All owners/operators of the manufactured housing park shall be responsible for the upkeep of all drives (access roads) within the confines of said park; the grounds shall be clear of all litter, trash, garbage, inoperable automobiles, trucks and the like as well as maintaining grounds (cutting of grass, maintenance of other landscaping) and drainage to assure a clean, habitable and sanitary environment. 
(11)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner/manager of said manufactured housing parks to not rent, lease or otherwise convey the use of property within the confined manufactured housing park until proper permits have been issued by the Clay County Building Official for said location. A registration shall be required to be kept on premises of all lots rented, leased or otherwise conveyed to include date, name, address, phone, lot number, size and model. 
(12)	An evergreen buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width and ten feet in height shall be planted along the side and rear yards lines of the manufactured housing unit park. 
(13)	All manufactured housing units shall have suitable skirting between the base of the unit and the ground. This skirting shall be made of either concrete block, brick, wood or other materials intended for such use. Openings in the skirting shall not be more than two inches square. 
(14)	All units shall have a minimum of an 18 inch by 24 inch latchable access door and required crawl space venting. 
(15)	Anchors: All units shall be provided with anchors as required by the latest published edition of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. 
(16)	Any unit not purchased directly from a factory or purchased new from a dealer must be inspected for condition before it is moved into the county. All units must meet the standards contained in the Southern Building Code. Once a unit passes inspection and required fees are paid, the County Inspector shall issue a permit. 
(17)	Manufactured housing unit space shall not be used for the accommodation of travel trailers or recreational vehicles under any circumstances. 
(18)	Age of units: The manufactured housing unit to be placed must be certified under the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and as applicable by the Georgia State Fire Marshal's Office and manufactured after June 15, 1976 prior to issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.059 - Detailed regulations for PUD. 
The regulations established for this District are intended to provide optional methods of land development with provisions for residential, commercial, religious, educational and cultural facilities, which are integrated with the total project by unified architectural and open space treatment. 
(A)	Permitted uses. Single-family attached and detached dwellings; duplexes; multi-family dwellings; condominiums and townhouses; uses permitted in the C-1 District and CORD districts; educational uses; and other religious and cultural uses. 
(B)	Preliminary development plan. A person applying for a zoning amendment to establish a PUD District shall submit a preliminary development plan to the Planning Commission, consisting of: 
(1)	A site plan showing:
(a)	The direction of north, appropriate scale and topography;
(b)	The location of subject property in relation to the entire county;
(c)	The use of the property adjacent to the site;
(d)	The proposed use of land and density of development for the site;
(e)	Proposed access to, and traffic circulation within, the site;
(2)	A proposed development schedule for the project;
(3)	The PUD shall be located in an area for which public facilities and services are available and adequate for the uses that are proposed; provided, however, that the applicant may provide such facilities which are not presently available and written assurance of such provision shall be included as a part of the preliminary development which is submitted; 
(4)	The Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners shall review and act on the proposed zoning request and any amendment to an approved preliminary development plan in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(C)	Final development plan. Prior to the removal of natural vegetation, restructuring of the land or construction of any improvements, an approved final development plan is required. A plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission, which is consistent with the preliminary development plan and containing: 
(1)	A site plan showing:
(a)	The direction of north, appropriate scale and existing and finished topography in not greater than five foot contour intervals; 
(b)	The proposed location and height of all structures;
(c)	The use of all structures and land;
(d)	The location and use of structures adjacent to the site;
(e)	The location, area and number of parking spaces and maneuvering areas;
(f)	The location and dimensions of streets, driveways and walks on and off the site;
(g)	All service and loading area and spaces;
(h)	The location, size, number and character of all exterior signs and lighting;
(i)	The location, character and extent of existing vegetation landscaping, retaining and screen walls and other treatment for the protection of adjoining property; 
(j)	The facilities for surface drainage of the premises;
(k)	Location and character of all public improvements, including utilities;
(2)	A copy of any deed restrictions to be recorded;
(3)	A comprehensive traffic analysis indicating the probable effect of the proposed development on traffic patterns and capacities of adjacent streets in the immediate area, prepared by a registered engineer or professional planner; 
(4)	A development schedule indicating the appropriate date when construction of the planned development or stage thereof can be expected to begin and be completed; 
(5)	Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this chapter and other ordinances of the availability of adequate utility capacity; 
(6)	A fire protection plan, approved by the Volunteer Fire Department servicing the area, indicating the location and size of all proposed fire mains, fire hydrants and fire access lanes, as well as a description of all fire protection measures and devices for structures; 
(7)	The public improvements included in the final development plan shall be consistent with the Clay County Subdivision Regulations. Compliance with the regulations shall be reviewed as part of the final development review process; 
(8)	The applicant shall provide for and/or establish an organization or other legal entity for the control and maintenance of any common open space designated on the final development plan. Such organization shall be created by covenants running with the land, and such covenants shall be included as a part of the final development plan(s) and subject to the approval of the Clay County Board of Commissioners; 
(9)	Structures and open space shall be arranged in such a way as best to serve the needs of residents and commercial users of the planned development and to minimize any adverse effects on the neighboring districts; 
(10)	Scenic assets and natural features, such as trees, streams and topographic features, shall be protected and preserved to the greatest extent possible; 
(11)	Not more than 50% of the gross tract area shall be covered by buildings in the PUD;
(12)	At least 50% of the area remaining after the development of the buildings, parking, right-of-way and utility or drainage easements shall be developed to serve the needs of the residents of the development, including but not limited to landscaping, patios, walks, play areas, recreation and other uses consistent with the character of the PUD; 
(13)	Buffers and building setbacks shall recognize and honor existing adjacent land development. However, in no case shall a building be constructed closer than 15 feet from the PUD District boundary, nor closer than 50 feet from any public road right-of-way; 
(14)	Adequate screening and separation between different land uses shall be provided by means of buffering or other acceptable methods; 
(15)	Vehicular access to the PUD shall be from streets capable of supporting existing and projected traffic. No streets or roads within the PUD shall connect to the public street system in such a way as to encourage use of minor streets for through streets; 
(16)	The PUD shall include provisions for safe and convenient pedestrian access and circulation.
(D)	Final development plan review. 
(1)	Upon receipt of an applicant's final development plan, the Planning Commission shall transmit a copy of the plan to the appropriate departments and agencies for their review, report and recommendation. Such officials and agencies shall each within 30 days from receiving the plan and documentation furnish to the Planning Commission a report pertinent to their respective jurisdiction and concerns. 
(2)	The Planning Commission shall review the applicant's final development plan and within 90 days following the applicant's submission of the plan to the Planning Commission shall also prepare a written report stating clearly the reasons and justifications therefore and identify what changes are necessary in order for the plan to be approved. The written disapproval shall be transmitted to the applicant. 
(E)	Amending final development plan. 
(1)	The final development plan may be amended by the Planning Commission, provided the procedure specified subsection (D) of this section for review and approval is followed. 
(2)	Minor changes in the location, siting or character of buildings and structures as shown on the final development plan may be authorized by the Building Official. No change authorized by the Building Official under this section may increase the size of any building or structure by more than 5%, nor change the location of any building or structure by more than ten feet in any direction; provided, notwithstanding anything in the foregoing, the Building Official may not permit change beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in this chapter. All other changes in the final development plan, including changes in the site plan and in the development schedule, must be made under the procedures that are applicable to the initial approval of a final development plan. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.060 - Regulations for a CORD. 
(A)	A site plan for the total acreage must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval to ensure consistency with the overall plans for the appropriate development of the county. Final approval of the plan rests with the governing authority. 
(B)	Amendments to the site plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and forwarded to the Board of Commissioners for final approval. 
(C)	When a CORD abuts a public road, the minimum setback requirements shall be those of the most restrictive adjacent zoning district. 
(D)	A green belt of 20 feet shall be required on three sides of the property.
(E)	Off-street parking as required in § 154.092. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.061 - Number of dwellings per lot. 
(A)	No more than one single-family detached dwelling and/or principal building and its customary accessory building shall hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
(B)	In the A-1 Agricultural District, there may be up to four single-family residential dwellings on any parcel of land under single ownership (three plus the owner's dwelling) where the following conditions can be met: 
(1)	The additional dwellings may be occupied by either blood relatives to the owner of the property and said blood relationship shall extend to but not beyond the second descending and ascending generation or full time caretaker employees of the property owner who are part of the farming operations and responsible for the agricultural production of the property; 
(2)	Each single-family detached dwelling shall occupy a land area not less than one and one-half acres and conform to the lot requirements of a R-1 District; 
(3)	Each such land area shall receive approval from the County Environmental Health Specialist as to the suitability of the site for an effective sanitary sewage disposal system; 
(4)	No commercial uses of the buildings are allowed and no rental charges can be placed on these units; 
(5)	Each dwelling shall be accessible to the public roadway;
(6)	Individual power supply sources shall be provided to each dwelling and each utility installation shall meet all code requirements; 
(7)	Permits for construction will not be issued prior to the approval of each of the aforementioned conditions by the Building Inspector or other designated agent. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.062 - Permitted uses in zoning districts. 
Uses allowed in each zoning district are determined from the matrix located on the following pages with (A) being uses allowed, (N) being uses not allowed and (C) being conditional uses requiring further review by the Planning Commission and approval by the Board of Commissioners in accordance to the zoning procedures of this chapter. See § 154.056 for further information on conditional uses. 

 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.063 - Determination of unclassified uses. 
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified under permitted uses or uses permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, and where such use is not specifically prohibited from the district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(A)	The Building Inspector or other designated agent shall submit to the Planning Commission a written request for determination of the unclassified use; 
(B)	The Planning Commission determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted within the district, then they shall instruct the Building Inspector or other designated agent to issue a permit; 
(C)	In the event that the Planning Commission determines that the proposed use in the district is consistent with the character and intent of permitted uses which are subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, then the applicant shall apply for a conditional use permit subject to the approval in the regular manner; 
(D)	In no event shall the provisions of this section be used to allow an incompatible use or use specifically prohibited by this chapter within a certain district; 
(E)	Once the use has been allowed or disallowed by the Planning Commission, it shall then be considered classified under the appropriated category in the district. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 5. - NONCONFORMING USE 

Sec. 154.075 - Continuation of a nonconforming use. 
Any structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its use provisions, may be continued with the following limitations: 
(A)	A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use;
(B)	A nonconforming use may not be re-established after discontinuance of that use for one year; 
(C)	A nonconforming use or structure may not be enlarged beyond its size at the time the use or structure became nonconforming. This includes, but is not limited to, the size of the building, the number of employees, operation during other hours of the day or night, the use of additional land and additional or more powerful equipment; 
(D)	A nonconforming structure may not be rebuilt, altered, repaired or replaced after incurring damages exceeding 75% of the fair market value of the structure at the time immediately preceding such damage occurring. A nonconforming mobile home may be replaced after it is removed from the property with a manufactured housing unit that is in compliance with the standards set forth in § 154.058 as long as such replacement occurs within 12 months of removal. Any period longer than 12 months, a nonconforming mobile home cannot be replaced after it is removed from the property. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.076 - Changing a nonconforming use. 
The Board of Commissioners may grant the change, re-establishment or enlargement of a nonconforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming structure upon the following finding: 
(A)	The change, establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use; 
(B)	The structure cannot be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the district; 
(C)	The structure would have to be removed to permit development of the property for conforming uses; 
(D)	The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming uses would cause economic hardship to the owner; 
(E)	The proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, replacement or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; and 
(F)	The requirements of this chapter for rezoning would prevent the current zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.077 - Applications for changing a nonconforming use. 
Applications submitted to the Board of Commissioners requesting the change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming use structure shall include the following information: 
(A)	The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the Board of Commissioners that the use or structure is legally nonconforming. The evidence may include, but is not limited to, business licenses, tax receipts, utility bills, telephone bills, IRS documents and affidavits; 
(B)	The applicant shall submit a plat of an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot size and location of all structures and their distance from all property lines, the names of all streets which the property abuts and parking spaces; 
(C)	If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. The description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs and other information as needed for the Board of Commissioners to reach a decision; 
(D)	The applicant shall provide evidence to the Board of Commissioners on how the proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement will comply with the current zoning, health and building requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.078 - Conditions on approval. 
If the requested change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement is approved, the Board of Commissioners may place conditions on the approval to ensure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 6. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 154.090 - Corner visibility. 
On a corner lot in any zoning district nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines 50 feet from the point of the intersection. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.091 - Off-premises signs. 
The following regulations shall apply to all off-premises signs: 
(A)	Off-premises signs are permitted in C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts;
(B)	Off-premises signs shall be permitted on a standard sign, which does not exceed five feet by ten feet, is constructed of 20-gauge sheet metal painted on each side and is supported by metal tubing posts of the type specified by the Standard Building Code; 
(C)	There shall be a minimum distance of 800 feet between all off-premises signs.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.092 - Off-street parking. 
(A)	Requirements for off-street parking. The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be required of the nonresidential uses specified below in all districts: 

 
(B)	Establishment of off-street parking. Whenever off-street parking is required for the development of a lot, it shall be established and maintained as follows: 
(1)	Each off-street parking space shall consist of a designated and defined area of at least ten feet in width and 20 feet in length exclusive of access drives and aisles; 
(2)	Except for lots devoted to single and two dwelling units per structure uses, all areas established for off-street parking shall be designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress; 
(3)	All area devoted to off-street parking shall have clearly defined access drives of ingress and egress not to exceed 25 feet, to include curbs; 
(4)	All area devoted to permanent off-street parking shall be of a hard surface or covered in such manner that no dust will result from continuous use. Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked or otherwise defined. Gravel or plant mix is also acceptable; 
(5)	No off-street parking space shall extend beyond any lot line; where an off-street parking space abuts a residential lot line, a setback line of five feet shall be established; 
(6)	All areas devoted to ingress or egress in a commercial, industrial or multifamily zone shall be denoted by curbing. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.093 - Off-street loading and unloading. 
(A)	In all zoning districts where permitted uses require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by truck or similar vehicle, off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided. Such requirements will apply to new structures or that portion of existing structures which are altered or expanded after the effective date of this chapter. 
(B)	Requirements of off-street loading and unloading space:
(1)	One space shall be required for the first 20,000 square feet of floor area plus one additional space for each 20,000 square feet of floor area up to 100,000 square feet and one space for each additional 40,000 square feet thereafter; 
(2)	The minimum size of an off-street loading and unloading space shall be ten feet by 50 feet exclusive of driveway and maneuvering space; 
(3)	No street or alley shall be considered as part of the off-street loading or unloading area; 
(4)	All areas for loading and unloading shall be so designed and located to permit vehicles to exit while facing a street or alley; 
(5)	Off-street loading and unloading spaces may occupy all or any part of any required yard area, except required vegetated buffer areas. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.094 - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.095 - Accessory buildings. 
(A)	An accessory building may be erected either attached or unattached to a principal building on the same lot. An attached accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building and shall comply with the requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(B)	An unattached accessory building shall be located in the rear yard of the principal building, shall not occupy more than 30% of the area of the rear yard, shall not be located closer than 15 feet to the principal building on an adjoining lot, shall not be located closer than ten feet to any rear or interior side lot line and shall not project into any required front or street side yard. On corner lots, the accessory building may not be located closer to the road right-of-way than the minimum setback requirement. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.096 - Auto wrecking, junkyards, body shops and motor vehicle garage. 
(A)	Location of automobile and junkyards. No operation shall be located nearer than 600 feet from any residential district. 
(B)	Screening. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted within an enclosed solid opaque fence or solid opaque wall not less than six feet in height nor more than ten feet in height. All of the above businesses shall ensure that the storage of vehicles is screened from public view from any public road. Additional screening may be required. Any fence or wall erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition. 
(C)	Storage of materials or vehicles.
(1)	The storage of salvaged materials, junk materials or vehicles shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(2)	Vehicles awaiting repair shall not be stored outside of the business establishment or fenced area for periods longer than 48 hours. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.097 - Cemetery (commercial). 
Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than ten acres. Structure setback shall conform to the district regulations in which the site is located. All burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any lot line. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.098 - Customary home occupations. 
Customary home occupations in those districts where permitted shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(A)	A home occupation shall be limited to the gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of the family residing entirely within the dwelling unit and no more than three nonresidents; 
(B)	No internal or external alterations shall be made which are not customary to dwellings;
(C)	In any dwelling unit, all home occupations, collectively, shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit but not to exceed 600 square feet; 
(D)	The entrance of the space devoted to a customary home occupation may be from within the building or a private outside entrance; 
(E)	No display shall be permitted of goods or services which are visible from the outside of the structure except for one non-illuminated sign having an area of not more than two square feet which may be placed flat on a door, wall or window; 
(F)	Customary home occupations shall be limited to goods and services provided to individuals or groups not exceeding, at any given time, five in number; 
(G)	Home occupation for telephone service only is permitted but shall be restricted to that use only; 
(H)	There shall not be any product stored in plain view or in the yard of the residence and there shall not be any parking of commercial vehicles at said property for over 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.099 - Swimming pools. 
The following regulations shall apply to swimming pools. Private swimming pools may be established in agricultural and residential zoning districts, provided they are to be used solely by the occupants of the property on which they are located and their guests. All noncommercial pools within a residential zone shall be enclosed by a secure fence or wall not less than five feet in height. See CORD section for commercial swimming pools. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.100 - Gasoline service stations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations: 
(A)	There shall be a building setback from all street right-of-way lines a distance of not less than 50 feet and the canopy of the gasoline building not less than 15 feet to any street right-of-way line. Other yard setbacks shall conform to the zone in which the station is located; 
(B)	Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way line; however, when pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the pavement edge, the pump island shall be located not less than 30 feet from the right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.101 - Storage of certain vehicles and equipment. 
The storage of certain vehicles and equipment, defined as automobiles, semi-trailer trucks with greater than three axles, camping or travel trailers and boats and boat motors without current license plates is prohibited in residential districts for time periods in excess of seven days unless such vehicles and equipment are stored in a carport, enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a building to a street. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.102 - Airports. 
Proposed public airports shall be so located and of sufficient size to meet Federal Aviation Agency requirements and not constitute a nuisance to surrounding uses. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.103 - Inert landfills. 
Permits for inert landfills must be approved by the appropriate state agencies and notifications of adjacent property owners prior to approval by the Board of Commissioners. Inert landfills already in operation and approved by the appropriate state agency for handling such permits and operations will be allowed to continue operation. However, any such expansion must have all necessary approvals with notifications of all adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 7. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 154.115 - General. 
The requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.116 - Front yard. 
The front yard requirements in this chapter shall not apply on lots where the average depth of existing yards on developed lots located within 100 feet on each side thereof and within the same block and zoning district is greater or less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case, the depth of the front yard on such lot shall be not less than the average front yard depth on such developed lots. On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.117 - Height limits. 
Height limitations do not apply to the following: chimneys, church steeples, flagpoles, grain elevators, distribution lines, towers and poles, radio and television antennas, water towers and similar structures. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.118 - Temporary uses. 
Buildings used in conjunction with construction work may only be permitted 30 days prior to the construction work. Such temporary buildings shall be removed no later than 15 days upon completion of the construction work. Manufactured housing units may be permitted in any zone, if a natural disaster has occurred. This use is permitted for only 30 days and then shall require additional approval for a time extension of 30 days from the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.119 - Existing lots of record. 
(A)	Any parcel of land in any district which was on record in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Clay County at the date of adoption of this chapter, or amended thereof, may be used as a building site even though such lot or parcel fails to meet the minimum requirements for a lot area, lot width or both. 
(B)	With respect to such lots or parcels, yard and other requirements shall be subject to the following: 
(1)	Meet applicable setback requirements;
(2)	Not to exceed the maximum lot coverage requirements;
(3)	Must have an approved on-site sewage permit from the local Environmental Health Specialist.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENTS AND ALTERATIONS 

Sec. 154.130 - Amendments generally. 
Amendment, as used in this section, means a change in the text of the zoning ordinance or a change in the Official Zoning Map(s) of the county authorized by a zoning decision made only after compliance with the procedures set for in this section. 
(A)	A proposed amendment to the text may be initiated by the Planning Commission or may be submitted to the Planning Commission by the Board of Commissioners or by any person who owns property within the zoning jurisdiction of the county. Unless initiated by the Board of Commissioners or by the Planning Commission, all proposed map amendments shall be submitted by the owner of such property or the authorized agent of the owner. An authorized agent shall have written authorization from the property owner, and such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. 
(B)	A proposed amendment to the map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, beginning with the date of the final decision by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners may at its discretion reduce or waive the 12-month interval between applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map affecting the same property; however, in the case of an application for a proposed amendment to the zoning map which was defeated by the Board of Commissioners, there shall be at least a six-month interval between the defeated application and the subsequent application affecting the same property unless the Board shall find and determine that the conditions under which the previous application for rezoning was made have substantially changed. The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications for proposed amendments initiated by the Board of Commissioners or by the Planning Commission, except for applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map which were defeated by the Board of Commissioners, in which case the interval required before a subsequent application may be filed shall be at least six months unless the Board shall find and determine that the conditions under which the previous application for rezoning was made have substantially changed. An application to amend zoning conditions may be submitted at any time. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.131 - Initiation of amendments. 
(A)	Each proposed amendment to the text or to the Official Zoning Map shall be initiated by filing an application with the Building Official/Zoning Office. 
(B)	Applications for proposed amendments shall include at least the following information:
(1)	Applications for proposed amendments to the text shall include the following information:
(a)	Name and address of the applicant;
(b)	Current provisions of the text to be affected by the proposed amendment;
(c)	Proposed wording of the proposed amendment to the text; and
(d)	Reason for proposed amendment;
(2)	Applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map shall include the following:
(a)	Name and address of the applicant;
(b)	A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned;
(c)	Three copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by an engineer or land surveyor, whose state registration is current and valid. The engineer's or land surveyor's seal shall be affixed to the plat; 
(d)	The present and proposed zoning district for the tract(s);
(e)	Existing intermediate floodplain area;
(f)	The names and addresses of the owner(s) of the land and of the agent(s) for the owners(s), if any; 
(g)	The map and parcel number as identified on the County's Tax Assessor map;
(3)	Applications for proposed amendments shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the Board of Commissioners. The schedule shall provide that each application for a proposed amendment shall be submitted at least 50 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the Board of Commissioners. A fee shall not be charged for proposed amendments initiated by members of the County Commission or by members of the Planning Commission when acting as agents of the governing authority; 
(4)	An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions and other zoning conditions which the applicant proposes as binding restrictions upon the development and use of the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. However, any such zoning conditions shall be filed with the Building Inspection/Zoning Office at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the Board of Commissioners. If any such zoning conditions are proposed by an application and have not been filed as required by this subsection, the Board of Commissioners, at the time of the public hearing on the proposed amendment, shall defer any action on such action on such proposed amendment to a specific meeting date. The date designated for action on the proposed amendment shall be set at a time which is sufficient to allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection; 
(5)	An applicant shall not be permitted to withdraw an application for a proposed amendment after the legal advertising for said proposed amendment, as required by this section, shall have first appeared, unless such withdrawal is made with the approval of the Board of Commissioners as provided in § 154.135. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.132 - Public notification. 
(A)	Legal notice. Notice of public hearings before the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners as required by the section shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the county and shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing and shall also include the location of property that is the subject of the zoning action, the present zoning district of said property and the proposed zoning district of said property. Such notice shall be published at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(B)	Signs posted. Clay County Board of Commissioners shall have a sign(s) posted in a conspicuous place(s) on the property to be rezoned, which shall contain information describing the proposed map amendment and the dates, times and places of the public hearings before the Planning Commission and the Clay County Board of Commissioners. Such sign shall be continuously displayed for at least 15 days prior to the public hearings. The sign(s) or any part of the sign shall not be removed from said property except by an authorized agent of the Board of Commissioners. 
(C)	Letters to abutting property owners. Where application is made for a proposed amendment to the zoning maps, the Building Inspection and/or Zoning Department shall notify, by regular mail, the owners, as shown by Clay County tax records, of property that abuts the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the Planning Commission public hearing and shall include a description of the proposed amendment and the dates, times and places of the public hearings before the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.133 - Public hearing procedures. 
Whenever a public hearing is required by these ordinances or by state law prior to a zoning decision, such public hearing, whether conducted by the Board of Commissioners or the Planning Commission, shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(A)	The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer.
(B)	The presiding officer shall explain the procedures to be followed in the conduct of a public hearing. 
(C)	If the subject of the hearing is a zoning decision initiated by a petitioner other than the County Commission, the petitioner requesting such zoning decision, or the petitioner's agent, shall be recognized first and shall be permitted to present and explain the request for the zoning decision. If the request for a zoning decision is initiated by the County Commission, all members of the County Commission shall be allowed to speak as they are recognized by the presiding officer, regardless of whether such a County Commission member speaks in favor of or in opposition to the proposed zoning decision. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak in favor of the zoning decision. 
(D)	After all individuals have had an opportunity to speak in accordance with subsection (C) above, those individuals present at the public hearing who wish to speak in opposition to the requested zoning decision shall have an opportunity to speak. 
(E)	When any person wishes to speak at a public hearing, he or she shall raise his or her hand and, after being recognized by the presiding officer, shall stand and give his or her name, address and make any comment appropriate to the proposed zoning decision. 
(F)	No time limit shall be imposed upon any person speaking at a public hearing, but all speakers are urged to make their comments brief and avoid repeating other comments. 
(G)	In the case of an application for a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance text or map, the applicant shall have an opportunity, after all comments in opposition have been made, to make summary remarks concerning the proposed zoning decision. 
(H)	Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the requested zoning decision is closed. The Planning Commission shall then convene its business session to consider the proposed amendment and shall, at that time, take action on its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. At the close of the public hearing before the Board of Commissioners, the Board shall immediately convene its business session and consider the recommendation for the zoning decision and take action on the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.134 - Planning commission public hearing and action. 
(A)	All applications for proposed amendments shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 154.132. 
(B)	The Planning Commission shall review and consider a recommendation to the Clay County Board of Commissioners with respect to the application for a proposed amendment. The Planning Commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make any of the following recommendations with respect to an application for a proposed amendment: approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal (if the applicant concurs), change of the zoning district requested or imposition of zoning conditions. If no recommendation is decided by the Planning Commission, then it shall report to the Board of Commissioners that it makes no recommendation on the application. 
(C)	The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation or report of no recommendation on an application for a proposed amendment to the Board of Commissioners prior to the scheduled public hearing in which the Board of Commissioners will consider the application for a zoning decision. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation or report prior to the public hearing, the Planning Commission's recommendation shall be deemed to be one of approval. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.135 - Board of commissioners public hearing and action. 
(A)	Before taking action on a proposed amendment and after receipt of the Planning Commission recommendations or reports thereon, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
(B)	So the purpose of this chapter will be served and so that the health, safety and general welfare will be secured, the Board of Commissioners in its decision on the application for a proposed amendment may, in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application for proposed amendment as submitted, defer a decision until a specific meeting date, require the applicant to file a site plan or other plans regarding the project development and defer action to a later meeting date or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. The Board of Commissioners shall determine whether the withdrawal shall be subject to the 12-month interval before refiling. The Board of Commissioners may also require that the land area for such application for proposed amendment is made be reduced, that the zoning district be changed to one other than that requested, or that zoning conditions be added or deleted, as the Board of Commissioners deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.136 - Zoning standards. 
Whenever Clay County shall exercise its zoning power, the following standards are considered relevant in balancing the county's interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property: 
(A)	Whether the zoning decision will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent or nearby properties which will be reasonably affected; 
(B)	Whether the zoning decision will adversely affect the existing use of adjacent or nearby property; 
(C)	Whether the property affected by the zoning decision has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(D)	Whether the zoning decision will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use or have a significant negative impact upon existing roads, transportation facilities, utilities, water or other natural resources, schools, churches or other facilities; 
(E)	Whether the zoning decision conforms with the policy and intent of an adopted land use plan to include the general purposes included in the Comprehensive Plan for Clay County, Georgia; 
(F)	Whether other conditions exist that affect the use and development of the property in question and support either approval or denial of the zoning decision; and 
(G)	Whether there has been demonstrated support or opposition to such use by or on behalf of the citizens of Clay County. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 9. - ALTERATION OF ZONING CONDITIONS 

Sec. 154.150 - Minor alterations approval. 
The Building Official or other authorized agent shall have the authority to approve the following minor alterations of zoning conditions, provided such alterations would not change the purpose intended for such zoning condition and would not adversely affect county services or other property: 
(A)	Building relocation, curb cut relocation and traffic circulation changes due to topographic, environmental or other design factors; 
(B)	Parking design; and
(C)	Utility relocation.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.151 - Amendments to zoning code. 
An owner of property of his or her authorized agent may file an application to amend any zoning conditions which have been made a part of a zoning decision by the Board of Commissioners if such changes requested cannot be effected under the provisions of § 154.150. The application shall be processed in accordance with the same procedures as those required for applications for proposed amendments as provided in §§ 154.150 and 154.151. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 154.165 - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the County Building Inspector or other designated agent. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.166 - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration or repair (with the exception of necessary repairs not affecting the external or party walls, chimneys, stairways or heights of buildings) of any structure until the Building Inspector or other designated agent has issued a building permit for such work, including a statement that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this chapter. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector or other designated agent on forms provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 154.999. 
Sec. 154.167 - Approval of plans and issuance of building permit. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector or other designated agent to approve any plans to issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he or she has inspected such plans in detail and found them to be in conformity with this chapter. To this end, the Building Inspector or other designated agent shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Building Inspector or other designated agent to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration is in conformance with this chapter and applicable building codes: 
(1)	The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
(2)	The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and any building or other structures already on the lot; 
(3)	The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures;
(4)	The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are observed. 
(B)	If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other related laws and ordinances, the Building Inspector or other designated agent shall issue a building permit accordingly. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the Building Inspector or other designated agent shall state in writing on the application the cause of such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.168 - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(A)	No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved or altered in its use shall be used until the Building Inspector or other designated agent has issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land or building or other structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)	Within three days after the owner or his or her agent has notified the Building Inspector that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or other designated agent to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this chapter, or if such certificate is reused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.169 - Remedies. 
In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector or other designated agent, any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or preceding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.170 - Variances. 
(A)	The Clay County Planning Commission may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of the Zoning Code. The Planning Commission may do so only if all of the following findings are made: 
(1)	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, shallowness or lot size or shape, exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located; 
(2)	That because such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Code and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property; 
(3)	That granting the variance will not result in authorization of a use not otherwise permitted in the district; 
(4)	The Planning Commission shall establish a reasonable time for hearing of any appeals authorized under this section and shall give at least 15-days' written notice by regular mail to all parties who are involved in the variance request and adjacent property owners. 
(B)	Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the Clay County Planning Commission may within 30 days thereafter appeal to the Clay County Board of Commissioners. If the party is still aggrieved the party may appeal to the Superior Court or court of like jurisdiction. The party must file with such board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal such Board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the case to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken and the case in such court to be tried de novo. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.171 - Fees. 
Fees for appeals and applications for amendments to this chapter shall be established as follows and shall be payable prior to action by respective bodies. Fees are not refundable once the required legal notification has been completed. 
(A)	Appeals: $30.00.
(B)	Amendments: $50.00. Includes: conditional use, text amendment, rezoning.
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.172 - Legal status. 
(A)	Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Clay County. Where the provisions of this chapter require or impose more restrictive standards than are required by any other ordinance or law, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where the provisions of any other ordinance or law require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such other ordinance or law shall control. 
(B)	Saving clause. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter which is not in and of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Sec. 154.999 - Penalty. 
(A)	Ordinance violations may be tried in the Superior Court of Clay County, Georgia, upon citation issued by the County Inspector or other designated agent. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused violator is to appear for trial, shall identify the violation with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service and shall be signed by the Building Inspector or other designated agent who shall complete and serve the citation. 
(B)	Prosecutions for violations of this chapter in accordance with this section shall be commenced by the completion, signing and service of the citation by the Building Inspector or other designated agent, either of whom is authorized by this chapter to issue citations. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, and a copy shall be promptly filed with the Superior Court. No person shall be arrested prior to the time of trial for violations under this section, but any person who fails to appear at trial shall be arrested thereafter on a warrant of the Superior Court and required to post a bond for his or her future appearance. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2002)
Chapter 155 - SITING AND CONSTRUCTION OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 155.01. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the County of Clay's authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The County finds that Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the Clay County and its inhabitants. The County also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the citizens of Clay County, Georgia and of significant benefit to Clay County and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is consistent with Clay County's land use policies, the Clay County Board of Commissioners is adopting a single, comprehensive, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities application and permit process. The intent of this Local Ordinance is to minimize impact of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of the visual and environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Clay County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.02. - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting Ordinance for the County of Clay, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.03. - Severability. 
(A)	If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this Ordinance or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed Application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(B)	Any Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit issued under this Ordinance shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.04. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Ordinance, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
"Accessory Facility or Structure" means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
"Antenna" means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. 
"Applicant" means any Wireless service provider submitting an Application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
"Application" means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an Applicant submits in order to receive a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
"Board" means the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia. 
"Co-location" means the use of an existing Tower or structure to support Antenna for the provision of wireless services. 
"Co-location Permit" means the official document or permit by which an Applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to use an existing Tower or structure to support Antenna for the provision of wireless services Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as granted or issued by the Board of Commissioners of Clay County, Georgia. 
"Completed Application" means an Application that contains all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an Application. 
"County" means Clay County, Georgia. 
"DAS" or "Distributive Access System" means a technology using antenna combining technology allowing for multiple carriers or Wireless Service Providers to us the same set of antennas. 
"FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
"Habitable" means fit for human habitation; fit for human/humans to live in. 
"Height" means, when referring to a Tower or structure, the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the Tower or structure, even if said highest point is an Antenna or lightening protection device. 
"IEEE" means the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
"Impracticability" or "Commercially Impracticable" means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable". 
"Modification" or "Modify" means, the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or change-out of equipment for better or more modern equipment. 
Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a Telecommunications Tower or Telecommunications Site as a co-location is a modification. A Modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding, removing or changing anything. 
"Need" means anything that is technically required for the wireless service to be provided primarily and essentially within the County of Clay with the least physical and visual impact. This does not necessarily mean the internal design standards of the applicant, as companies. standards can vary greatly and normally reflect preferences. Rather, "Need" relates to the ability of the user-equipment to function as designed. 
"NIER" means Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
"Personal Wireless Facility" See definition for, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
"Personal Wireless Services" or "PWS" or "Personal Telecommunications Service" or "PTS" shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
"Repairs and Maintenance" means the replacement or repair of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted. 
"State" means the State of Georgia. 
"Stealth" or "Camouflage" means disguising a tower or wireless telecommunications facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless telecommunications facility. 
"Stealth" or "Stealth Technology" means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
Stealth technology expressly includes such technology as DAS or its functional equivalent. 
"Tall Structure Permit" means the official document or permit by which an Applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as granted or issued by the County of Clay. 
"Telecommunication Site" See definition for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
"Telecommunications" means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
"Telecommunications Structure" means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
"Temporary" means temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this Ordinance, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days. 
"Tower" means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal. 
"Wireless Telecommunications Facilities" means and includes a "Telecommunications Site" and "Personal Wireless Facility". It means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support Antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, Towers of all types, kinds and structures, including, but not limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as a support structure for Antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal Communications Services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.05. - Overall policy and desired goals for tall structure permit or co-location permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
In order to ensure that the placement, construction and modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities protects the citizens of Clay County, Georgia's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this Ordinance, the Clay County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts an overall policy with respect to a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
(A)	Requiring a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for any new, co-location or modification of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility. 
(B)	Implementing an Application process for person(s) seeking a Tall Structure Permit or Colocation Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(C)	Establishing a policy for examining an application and issuing a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that is both fair and consistent. 
(D)	Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities among service providers. 
(E)	Requiring, promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to, the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(F)	In granting a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, the Clay County Board of Commissioners has found that the facility shall be the most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the County. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.06. - Exceptions from a tall structure permit or co-location permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)	No Person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility as of the effective date of this Ordinance without having first obtained a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility as defined in Section 155.04 of this Ordinance or an administratively granted authorization granted under Section 155.09 of this Ordinance, whichever is applicable. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit shall be required for those noncommercial exceptions noted in Section 155.07, unless deemed in the public interest by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(B)	If constructed as required by permit, all legally permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that existed on or before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any visible modification of an existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility will require the complete facility, including the tower if applicable, and any new installation to comply with this Ordinance, as will anything changing the structural load. 
(C)	Any Repair and Maintenance of a Wireless Facility does not require an application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. However, no additional construction or site modification will be permitted. 
(D)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and all subparts thereof, the colocation and/or shared use of antennas on existing telecommunication towers or other tall structures or compatible use structures, such as utility poles, water towers, and other towers, shall be exempt from the Public Hearing requirement otherwise required for a tower, and shall be subject only to an administrative review process by the Clay County Board of Commissioners and its designee. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.07. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this Ordinance: 
(A)	The Clay County's fire, Sheriff's or other public service facilities owned and operated by the County and/or its employees and constitutional officers. 
(B)	Any facilities expressly exempt from Clay County's siting, building and permitting authority. 
(C)	Over-the-Air reception Devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multi-channel multipoint distribution (wireless or cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations (TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless signals that are primarily used for reception, but not including microwave dishes. 
(D)	Facilities used exclusively for private, noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar noncommercial Telecommunications. 
(E)	Facilities used exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies, such as IEEE 802.11a, b, g and n services (e.g., Wi-Fi and Bluetooth) where the facility does not require a new tower. 
(F)	Facilities used exclusively for agricultural telemetry purposes.
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.08. - Tall structure permit or co-location permit application and other requirements for a new tower or for increasing the height of the structure to be attached to. 
(A)	All Applicants for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The Clay County Board of Commissioners is the officially designated agency or body of the County of Clay to whom applications for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permits for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The Clay County Board of Commissioners may at its discretion delegate or designate the Clay County Planning Board or other official agencies or officials of the County of Clay or expert consultants to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the Clay County Commission with respect to the granting or not granting or revoking Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permits for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(B)	The nonrefundable Application fee for construction of a new Tower or other structure increasing the height shall be $500.00. 
(C)	All Applicants shall closely follow the instructions for preparing an Application that shall be provided prior to the submittal of an Application or at any time upon request. Not closely following the instructions without permission to deviate from such may result in the Application being returned without action and forfeiting the Application fee, but not the escrow deposit. 
(D)	When placing wireless facilities on government-owned property or facilities, only noncommercial wireless carriers and users are exempt from the permitting requirements of this Ordinance. 
(E)	The Clay County Board of Commissioners may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise not complete. 
(F)	No Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified until the Application is reviewed and approved by the Clay County Board of Commissioners and the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit has been issued. 
(G)	Any and all representations made by the Applicant to Clay County on the record during the Application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the Application and will be deemed to have been relied upon in good faith by the County. Any verbal misrepresentation shall be treated as if it were made in writing. 
(H)	An Application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be signed on behalf of the Applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. 
(I)	The Applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as proposed on the Site. This requires an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed letter of agency acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is required. 
(J)	The Applicant shall include a statement in writing:
(1)	That the applicant's proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the Clay County Board of Commissioners in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable Clay County, State and Federal Laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(2)	That the construction of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the Applicant is authorized to do business in the State. 
(K)	In addition to all other required information as stated in this Ordinance, all applications for the construction or installation of new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or modification of an existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. 
Note that an Applicant will be granted permission for anything that it can conclusively prove the technical need for, but that there is often a significant difference between need, and want, or desire. For example, an assertion that the "need is based on an Applicant's own design criteria shall not suffice to prove the technological need for what is requested. For purposes of permitting under this Ordinance, "need" shall mean what is technologically needed for the equipment to function as designed by the manufacturer and that anything less will result in prohibiting or acting in a manner that prohibits the provision of service as intended and described in the narrative of the Application. 
Proof of Need for the Facility: 
(1)	A detailed narrative description and explanation of the specific objective(s) for the new facility, or the modification of an existing wireless facility, expressly including and explaining the purpose and need for the facility, such as coverage and/or capacity needs or requirements, and the specific geographic area of intended coverage; 
(2)	Technical Documentation that proves the need for the Wireless Telecommunications Facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the County. Such documentation shall include a propagation study of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed or existing sites, that demonstrates a significant gap in coverage and/or, if a capacity issue is involved, to include an analysis of the current and projected usage (traffic studies) using generally accepted industry methods and standards so as to conclusively prove the need for what is proposed. The Board or its designee may require the provision of all technical or engineering data and information used by the Applicant to make it's determination as regards the need for the facility or the change to the existing facility; 
(3)	All of the modeling information (i.e., data) inputted into the software used to produce the propagation studies, including, but not limited to any assumptions made, such as ambient tree height; 
(4)	A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless Telecommunications Facility, as well as a copy of the five- and ten-year build-out plan required by the FCC; 
(5)	The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment;
(6)	The maximum transmission power capability of all radios, as designed, if the Applicant is a cellular or functional equivalent carrier, or the maximum transmission power capability, as designed, of all transmission facilities if the Applicant is not a cellular or functional equivalent carrier; 
(7)	The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP), both in OHM's and watts; Note: In effect what is needed is the information that the Company used to make its determination as regards the need for the facility in the first place, the need and reason for the requested location and the need for the height requested. 
Ownership and Management: 
(1)	The Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the Application;
(2)	The Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the Applicant, including the legal name of the Applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall be provided; 
(3)	The Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
(4)	A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
Land Use and Planning: 
(1)	The Land Use Pattern of the block or neighborhood in which the property is situated;
(2)	The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(3)	The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the Application; 
(4)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the Tower identifying all users and attachments to the Tower and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(5)	If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate; 
(6)	The azimuth, size and centerline height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the supporting structure; 
(7)	The number, type and model of the Antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of the specification sheet(s) for the antennas. 
Safety: 
(1)	If attaching to an existing Tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the Tower; 
(2)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g., guyed, self-supporting lattice or monopole; 
(3)	If attaching to an existing Tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the Tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State, proving the tower's capability to safely accommodate the facilities of the Applicant without change or modification, taking into account the geotechnical situation and the foundation design; 
(4)	If any change or modification of the Tower or other structure to be attached to is needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made; 
(5)	If the structure proposed to be attached to is a Tower that has not previously been permitted under this Law, or unless the Applicant can provide proof that this was provided at the time of the initial application for the Tower or other structure, the Applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for the tower site or other structure; 
(6)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a copy of the latest ANSI Inspection Report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F-Annex E for any self-supporting Tower that is five years old or older or for any guyed Tower that is three years old or older. If an ANSI Inspection report has not been done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ANSI report shall be done and submitted as part of the Application; 
(7)	If not attaching to an existing Tower, but rather a different type of structure, a Structural Report signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to do business in the State and bearing that engineer's currently valid stamp, showing the structural adequacy of the structure to accommodate the proposed Wireless Facility(s), including any equipment shelter, unless the equipment shelter is located on the ground or on the lowest floor of a building; 
(8)	If attaching to a structure other than a Tower, to which the public has or could reasonably have or gain access to, an Applicant shall provide documentation, including all calculations, proving that the potential exposure to RF Radiation (i.e., NIER or Non-Ion Emitting Radiation), will be in compliance with the most recent Federal Communications Commission regulations governing RF Radiation and exposure thereto, and further denoting the minimum distance from any antennas an individual may safely stand without being exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards and any portion(s) of the structure that would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards. In compliance with the FCC's regulations, in such an instance the RF Radiation from all wireless facilities shall be included in the calculations to show the cumulative effect on any area of the building or structure deemed accessible by the public. Such report or analysis shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State; or 
(9)	In an instance on a Tower where the new Wireless Facilities will be ten meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC's "Checklist to Determine whether a Facility may Categorically Excluded" shall be provided to verify that the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC's RF Emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF Emissions study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to subsection (K)(21) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be verified; 
(10)	If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable warning barrier to discourage approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black striped warning tape or a suitable warning barrier, as well as placing RF Radiation signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger; 
(11)	A signed statement that the Applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services. 
(L)	To protect the nature and character of the area and create the least visually intrusive impact reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, any attachment to a building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted on the facie, unless it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, and all such attachments and exposed cabling shall use camouflage or stealth techniques to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the structure to which such equipment is attached. 
(M)	If attaching to a water tank, mounting on the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall only be permitted if the Applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. The provisions of the preceding subsection (J) of this section shall also apply to any attachment to a water tank. 
(N)	The Applicant shall provide a certification by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State, along with documentation (a structural analysis), including calculations, that prove that the tower or other structure and its foundation as proposed to be utilized are designed and were constructed to meet all local State, Federal and ANSI structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and the placement of any equipment on the roof a building after the addition of the proposed new facilities. 
(O)	If the Application is to attach to or modify existing facilities on a Tower, the applicant shall provide signed documentation of the Tower condition; specifically a report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F (or 222G if adopted by the State) - Annex E for any self-supporting Tower that is five years old or older or for a guyed Tower that is three years old or older. Any deficiencies, other than strictly cosmetic ones, must be completed or remedied prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the attachment of any component of the proposed Wireless Facilities. 
(P)	So as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect and create the least intrusive or lowest profile or visual silhouette reasonably possible, unless it can be proven that such would be technologically impracticable, all antennas attached to a tower or other structure shall be flush-mounted or as near to flush-mounted as is possible without prohibiting or having the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, or prove technically, with hard data and a detailed narrative, that flush mounting can not be used and would serve to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(Q)	Unless it is deemed inappropriate or unnecessary by the County given the facts and circumstances, the Applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility up to a height of ten feet. 
(R)	The Wireless Telecommunications Facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth, camouflage or concealment technology as may be required by the County and as is not impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(S)	All utilities installed for a new Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be installed underground and in compliance with all Laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of Clay County, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(T)	If deemed necessary or appropriate, an access road, turn around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion and shall comply with any local or State regulations for the construction of roads. If the facility currently has an access road or turn around space, but such is deemed in disrepair or in need of remedial work to make it serviceable and safe and in compliance with any applicable regulations, the Application shall contain a commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so that it is serviceable and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations. 
(U)	The Applicant, and the owner of record of any structure or tower attached to, shall, jointly or separately, at its cost and expense, be required to place with the County a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the County as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $25,000.00 for attaching to an existing structure or existing tower and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the County to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Law and conditions of any Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit issued pursuant to this Law. Said bond or other security shall also serve as a Removal Security to prevent the taxpayers from bearing the cost of removal in the event of the abandonment or cessation of use for more than 90 consecutive days. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.09. - Requirements for an application to attach to an existing tower or other structure without increasing the height of the tower or structure being attached to. 
(A)	The nonrefundable Application fee for attaching to an existing Tower or other structure without increasing the height shall be $300.00. 
(B)	To prevent the taxpayers from having to pay for the expert technical assistance needed by the County that is necessitated by the application, an Applicant shall be required to place with the County an escrow deposit of no less than $8,500.00. After all invoices have been paid and the Certificate of Completion or Occupancy has been granted, any unexpended balance of the escrow deposit shall be returned to the Applicant upon request. 
(C)	An application to increase the height of a Tower or other structure shall be deemed a new tower and shall not qualify for treatment as an attachment to an existing Tower or other structure under this Section. 
(D)	There shall be no public hearing required for an application to attach to an existing tower or other structure or to modify an existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height of the Tower or other structure to be attached to, including attachments thereto, unless for good cause such shall be required by the County Commissioners or Code Enforcement. Instead, the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit or other appropriate authority shall be issued by the appropriate department head. 
(E)	An Application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for attaching wireless facilities to an existing structure, including but not limited to, cellular or PCS facilities and microwave facilities, shall contain the following information and comply with the following requirements. 
(F)	Documentation shall be provided proving that the Applicant has the legal right to proceed as proposed on the Site, including an executed copy of the lease with the owner of the facility proposed to be attached to, or a letter of agency, showing the right of the Applicant to attach to the structure. 
(G)	A Pre-Application meeting shall be held and at or before the Pre-Application meeting, the Applicant shall be provided instructions for completing an Application. Said instructions are to be controlling as regards the form and substance of the issues addressed in the Instructions and must be followed. 
(H)	The Applicant shall include a written statement that:
(1)	The Applicant's proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of all applicable permits and authorizations, without exception, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable Clay County, State and Federal Laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(2)	The construction of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the Applicant is authorized to do business in the State. 
(I)	An application for attaching to an existing structure or for modifying an existing facility without increasing the height of the structure shall contain the following information. 
Proof of Need for the Facility: 
(1)	A detailed narrative description and explanation of the specific objective(s) for the new facility, orthe modification of an existing wireless facility, expressly including and explaining the purpose and need for the facility, such as coverage and/or capacity needs or requirements, and the specific geographic area of intended coverage; 
(2)	Technical Documentation that proves the need for the Wireless Telecommunications Facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the County. Such documentation shall include a propagation study of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed or existing sites, that demonstrates a significant gap in coverage and/or, if a capacity issue is involved, to include an analysis of the current and projected usage (traffic studies) using generally accepted industry methods and standards so as to conclusively prove the need for what is proposed. The Board or its designee may require the provision of all technical or engineering data and information used by the Applicant to make it's determination as regards the need for the facility or the change to the existing facility; 
(3)	All of the modeling information (i.e., data) inputted into the software used to produce the propagation studies, including, but not limited to any assumptions made, such as ambient tree height; 
(4)	A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless Telecommunications Facility, as well as a copy of the five- and ten-year build-out plan required by the FCC; 
(5)	The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment;
(6)	The maximum transmission power capability of all radios, as designed, if the Applicant is a cellular or functional equivalent carrier, or the maximum transmission power capability, as designed, of all transmission facilities if the Applicant is not a cellular or functional equivalent carrier; 
(7)	The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP), both in ohms and watts. 
Note: In effect what is needed is the information that the Company used to make its determination as regards the need for the facility in the first place, the need and reason for the requested location and the need for the height requested. 
Ownership and Management: 
(1)	The Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the Application;
(2)	The Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the Applicant, including the legal name of the Applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall be provided; 
(3)	The Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
(4)	A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
Land Use and Planning: 
(1)	The Land Use Pattern of the block or neighborhood in which the property is situated;
(2)	The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(3)	The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the Application; 
(4)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the Tower identifying all users and attachments to the Tower and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(5)	If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate; 
(6)	The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the supporting structure; 
(7)	The number, type and model of the Antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of the specification sheet(s) for the antennas. 
Safety: 
(1)	If attaching to an existing Tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the Tower; 
(2)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g., guyed, self-supporting lattice or monopole; 
(3)	If attaching to an existing Tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the Tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State, proving the tower's capability to safely accommodate the facilities of the Applicant without change or modification, taking into account the geotechnical situation and the foundation design; 
(4)	If any change or modification of the Tower or other structure to be attached to is needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made; 
(5)	If the structure proposed to be attached to is a Tower that has not previously been permitted under this Law, or unless the Applicant can provide proof that this was provided at the time of the initial application for the Tower or other structure, the Applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for the tower site or other structure; 
(6)	If attaching to an existing Tower, a copy of the latest ANSI Inspection Report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F - Annex E for any self-supporting Tower that is five years old or older or for any guyed Tower that is three years old or older. If an ANSI Inspection report has not been done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ANSI report shall be done and submitted as part of the Application; 
(7)	If not attaching to an existing Tower, but rather a different type of structure, a Structural Report signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to do business in the State and bearing that engineer's currently valid stamp, showing the structural adequacy of the structure to accommodate the proposed Wireless Facility(s),including any equipment shelter, unless the equipment shelter is located on the ground or on the lowest floor of a building; 
(8)	If attaching to a structure other than a Tower, to which the public has or could reasonably have or gain access to, an Applicant shall provide documentation, including all calculations, proving that the potential exposure to RF Radiation (i.e., NIER or Non-Ion Emitting Radiation), will be in compliance with the most recent Federal Communications Commission regulations governing RF Radiation and exposure thereto, and further denoting the minimum distance from any antennas an individual may safely stand without being exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards and any portion(s) of the structure that would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards. In compliance with the FCC's regulations, in such an instance the RF Radiation from all wireless facilities shall be included in the calculations to show the cumulative effect on any area of the building or structure deemed accessible by the public. Such report or analysis shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State; or 
(9)	In an instance on a Tower where the new Wireless Facilities will be ten meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC's "Checklist to Determine whether a Facility may Categorically Excluded" shall be provided to verify that the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC's RF Emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF Emissions study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to this subsection (I) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be verified; 
(10)	If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF Radiation, that section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable warning barrier to discourage approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black striped warning tape or a suitable warning barrier, as well as placing RF Radiation signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger; 
(11)	A signed statement that the Applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services. 
(J)	To protect the nature and character of the area and create the least visually intrusive impact reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, any attachment to a building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted on the facie, unless it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, and all such attachments and exposed cabling shall use camouflage or stealth techniques to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the structure to which such equipment is attached. 
(K)	If attaching to a water tank, mounting on the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall only be permitted if the Applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. The provisions of the preceding subsection (J) of this section shall also apply to any attachment to a water tank. 
(L)	The Applicant shall provide a certification by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State, along with documentation (a structural analysis), including calculations, that prove that the tower or other structure and its foundation as proposed to be utilized are designed and were constructed to meet all local State, Federal and ANSI structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and the placement of any equipment on the roof a building after the addition of the proposed new facilities. 
(M)	If the Application is to attach to or modify existing facilities on a Tower, the applicant shall provide signed documentation of the Tower condition; specifically a report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F (or 222G if adopted by the State) - Annex E for any self-supporting Tower that is five years old or older or for a guyed Tower that is three years old or older. Any deficiencies, other than strictly cosmetic ones, must be completed or remedied prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the attachment of any component of the proposed Wireless Facilities. 
(N)	So as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect and create the least intrusive or lowest profile or visual silhouette reasonably possible, unless it can be proven that such would be technologically impracticable, all antennas attached to a tower or other structure shall be flush-mounted or as near to flush-mounted as is possible without prohibiting or having the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, or prove technically, with hard data and a detailed narrative, that flush mounting can not be used and would serve to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(O)	Unless it is deemed inappropriate or unnecessary by the County given the facts and circumstances, the Applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility up to a height of ten feet. 
(P)	The Wireless Telecommunications Facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth, camouflage or concealment technology as may be required by the County and as is not impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(Q)	All utilities installed for a new Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be installed underground and in compliance with all Laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of Clay County, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(R)	If deemed necessary or appropriate, an access road, turn around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion and shall comply with any local or State regulations for the construction of roads. If the facility currently has an access road or turn around space, but such is deemed in disrepair or in need of remedial work to make it serviceable and safe and in compliance with any applicable regulations, the Application shall contain a commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so that it is serviceable and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations. 
(S)	The Applicant, and the owner of record of any structure or tower attached to, shall, jointly or separately, at its cost and expense, be required to place with the County a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the County as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $25,000.00 for attaching to an existing structure or existing tower and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the County to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Law and conditions of any Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit issued pursuant to this Law. Said bond or other security shall also serve as a Removal Security to prevent the taxpayers from bearing the cost of removal in the event of the abandonment or cessation of use for more than 90 consecutive days. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.10. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)	Applicants for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall locate, site and erect said Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and five being the lowest priority: 
(1)	On publicly-owned properties or facilities.
(2)	On existing Towers or other structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure. 
(3)	On properties in any areas being used for Business use.
(4)	On properties in any areas being used for Agricultural use.
(5)	On properties in any areas being used for Residential use.
(B)	If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation and justification must be provided as to why a site of any higher priority designations was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the Applicant if the permit were not granted for the Wireless Facility as proposed. 
(C)	An Applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected or because there is an existing lease with a landowner. An Application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the County why co-location is commercially impracticable or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
(D)	Notwithstanding the above, the Clay County Board of Commissioners may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the Board of Commissioners finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the County and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. Conversely, the Board of Commissioners may direct that the proposed location be changed to another location that is more in keeping with the goals of this Ordinance and the public interest as determined by the Board of Commissioners. 
(E)	If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the Application, including the technical justification for such. 
(F)	Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the Clay County Board of Commissioners may disapprove an Application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
(2)	Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or district;
(3)	The use or construction of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific land use designation; 
(4)	The placement and location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the County, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5)	The placement and location of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility would result in a conflict with, compromise in or change of the nature or character of the surrounding area; 
(6)	Conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance;
(7)	Failure to submit a complete Application as required under this Ordinance.
(G)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, for good cause shown, such as the ability to utilize a shorter or less intrusive facility elsewhere and still accomplish the primary service objective, the Clay County Board of Commissioners may require the relocation of a proposed site, including allowing for the fact that relocating the site chosen by the Applicant may require the use of more than one site to provide substantially the same service if the relocation could result in a less intrusive facility or facilities, singly or in combination, so long as such does not prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.11. - Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities and other structures. 
(A)	Clay County, as opposed to the construction of a new Tower, requires Wireless Facilities to be located on existing Towers or other suitable structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure, unless such is proven to be technologically impracticable. The Applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying all existing Towers and other suitable structures within one mile of the location of any proposed new Tower, unless the Applicant can show that some other distance is more appropriate and reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing Tower or other suitable structure cannot be used. 
(B)	An Applicant intending to locate on an existing Tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the Applicant. 
(C)	Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum Antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within Clay County, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.12. - Height of telecommunications tower(s). 
(A)	All new towers shall be of the monopole type, unless such is able to be proven to be technologically impracticable. No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly granted. 
(B)	The Applicant shall submit documentation justifying the technical need by the service provider for the total height of any Tower, Facility and/or Antenna requested and the basis therefore. To enable verification of the need for the requested height, documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to produce the studies at the height requested and at a minimum of ten feet lower height. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within Clay County, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(C)	The maximum permitted total height of a new Tower shall be 120 above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be proven that such height would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended service area. The 120-foot maximum permitted height is not as-of-right height, but rather the maximum permitted height, absent proof of the technological need for a greater height. 
(D)	Notwithstanding the 120-foot maximum permitted height, Telecommunications Towers and Facilities shall be no taller than the minimum height technologically necessary to enable the provision of wireless service coverage or capacity as needed within Clay County, and only within Clay County. 
(E)	Spacing or the distance between towers shall be such that the service may be provided without exceeding the maximum permitted height. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.13. - Visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required by Ordinance or State or Federal Regulation. 
(B)	Stealth: All new Wireless Telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to towers, shall utilize Stealth or Camouflage techniques and technology, unless such can be shown to be either Commercially or Technologically Impracticable. 
(C)	Dual Mode: In order to minimize the number of antenna arrays and thus the visual impact, Clay County may require the use of dual mode antennas to be used, including by two different carriers, unless it can be proven that such will not work technologically and that such would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(D)	Tower Finish/Color: Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(E)	Lighting: If lighting is required, Applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under State and Federal regulations. All towers requiring lighting shall be lighted so as to effectively eliminate the ground scatter effect of the lighting and so as to prevent the light from being seen from the ground. 
(F)	Flush Mounting: All new or replacement antennas, except omni directional whip antennas, shall be flush-mounted on any tower or other structure, unless the Applicant can prove that it is technologically impracticable. If not flush-mounted, the antennas shall be attached so as to create smallest profile reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, unless it can be proven that to do so would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the service. 
(G)	Placement on Building—Facie: If attached to a building, all antennas shall be mounted on the facia of the building and camouflaged so as to match the color and, if possible, texture of the building or in a manner so as to make the antennas as visually innocuous and undetectable as is possible given the facts and circumstances involved. 
(H)	Lighting—Preventing Ground Scatter Effect: For any Wireless Facility for which lighting is required under the FAA's regulations, or that for any reason has lights attached, all such lighting shall be affixed with technology that enables the light to be seen as intended from the air, but that prevents the ground scatter effect so that it not able to be seen from the ground to a height of at least 12 degrees vertical for a distance of at least one mile in a level terrain situation. Such device must be compliant with or not in conflict with FAA regulations. A physical shield may be used, as long as the light is able to be seen from the air, as intended by the FAA. 
(I)	In the event a tower that is lighted is modified, at the time of the modification the Clay County may require that the Tower be retrofitted with the technology set forth in the preceding subsection (F). 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.14. - Security of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Antennas shall be located, fenced at a minimum height of eight feet or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. 
Specifically: 
(A)	All Antennas, Towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(B)	Transmitters and Telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.15. - Signage. 
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF Radiation or to control exposure to RF Radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size is also to be installed to contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the Antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the Applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration site, as applicable, is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.16. - Lot size and setbacks. 
(A)	All proposed Towers and any other proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility attachment structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A distance equal to the height of the proposed Tower or Wireless Telecommunications Facility structure plus ten percent of the height of the Tower or structure, otherwise known as the Fall Zone, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying land use plan, whichever is greater. Any Accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. The fall zone or setback shall be measured from the nearest portion of the right-of-way of any public road or thoroughfare and any occupied building or domicile. Further, the nearest portion of any access road to a wireless facility shall be no less than 15 feet from the nearest property line. 
(B)	There shall be no development of habitable buildings within the Fall Zone or setback area set forth in the preceding subsection (A). 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.17. - Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant. 
(A)	Clay County may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the County in reviewing and evaluating the Application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site inspections. 
(B)	To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear the cost related to the issue of the regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, an Applicant shall deposit with Clay County funds sufficient to reimburse the County for all reasonable costs of: i) consulting and expert evaluation and consultation with the County or the Applicant in connection with the submission and/or review of any Application; ii) any lease negotiations, the pre approval evaluation, and including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $6,500.00. The placement of the $6,500.00 with the County shall precede the pre-application meeting or any work being done as regards processing an application. The County will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The County's consultants/experts shall invoice the County for its services in reviewing the Application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the Applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the County, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the County before any further action or consideration is taken on the Application. In the event that the amount held in escrow is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the Applicant upon written request. 
(C)	To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear any cost related to the issue of the regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, no work shall be done on an application for which the full amount of the escrow deposit as set forth in the preceding subsection (B) of this section has not been placed with the County. In the event the escrow deposit minimum balance as set forth in this subsection (B) is not maintained, all work on the Application shall cease until the deposit is replenished as required. 
(D)	The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (B) of this section may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of the Application, necessary discussions with the Applicant and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification, upon approval by the County Planning Director. 
(E)	Records of all outside costs associated with the review and permitting process shall be maintained and available for public inspection, in compliance with applicable Georgia law in the Planning Department. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.18. - Public hearing and notification requirements. 
(A)	Prior to the approval of any Application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for a new tower or for any facility that increases the height of the structure to which it is to be attached, a public hearing shall be held by the County, notice of which shall be published in the official newspaper (legal organ) of the County no more than 45 days and no less than 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the nearby landowners are aware of the public hearing, the Applicant shall notify all landowners within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are proposed to be located and the Application shall contain the names and address of all such landowners. Such notification shall be by Certified U.S. Mail. Applicant shall provide proof in writing of notification to the County. The notices provided for in this subsection shall state the time, place and purpose of the public hearing as well as the nature of the request provided for in the application. 
(B)	The County shall schedule the public hearing referred to in Subsection (A) of this section once it finds the Application is complete and is not required to set a date if the Application is not complete. The County, at any stage prior to issuing a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary as such relates to the issue of the siting, construction or modification of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.19. - Action on an application for a tall structure permit or co-location permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)	The County will undertake a review of an Application pursuant to this Article in a timely fashion, consistent with its responsibilities, and in accordance with the controlling language and requirement as set forth in Federal Law (the Telecommunications Act of 1996) shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the Application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the Applicant's desire for a timely action on the Application. 
(B)	The County may refer any Application or part thereof to the Clay County Planning Commission or any advisory or other committee of its choice for a public hearing and/or a nonbinding recommendation. 
(C)	After the public hearing and after formally considering the Application, the Board of Commissioners may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the Applicant. 
(D)	If the Board of Commissioners approves the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the Applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten calendar days of the County's action, and the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit or other appropriate authorization shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent Certificates of Compliance, once a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the County, such as site plan approvals, shall be required by the County for the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities covered by the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(E)	If the Board of Commissioners denies the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit or other appropriate authorization for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the Applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten calendar days of the Board of Commissioners action and shall set forth in writing the reason or reasons for the denial. Appeals from such decision, if any shall be filed and handled pursuant to the Clay County Land Use Plan Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.20. - Extent and parameters of tall structure permit or co-location permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
The extent and parameters of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be as follows: 
(A)	Such Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the County. 
(B)	The facility shall be complete and be operationally ready no later than 120 days after the grant of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(C)	In the event of a violation of this Ordinance, following an opportunity to cure and, if not cured within the timeframe set forth in the notice of violation, a hearing shall be held upon due prior notice to the Applicant. Following such hearing, if found to be in violation of this Ordinance, the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit may be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, or for a material violation of this Ordinance or other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
(D)	Notice of a violation and of the date, time and place of a hearing shall be provided by registered mail to the last known address of the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.21. - Application fee. 
At the time that a person submits an Application for a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit or other appropriate authorization for a new Tower or a co-located facility, such person shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the Clay County Fee Schedule, as may be amended or changed from time to time. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.22. - Removal and performance security. 
The Applicant and the owner of record of any proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute with the Applicant and file with the County a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the County as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a tower with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the County to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and conditions of any Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.23. - Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications facilities. 
In order to verify that the holder of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, place and construct such facilities, including Towers and Antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and land use plan, Laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the County may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, Towers, Antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.24. - Liability insurance. 
(A)	A holder of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit in amounts as set forth below: 
(1)	Commercial General Liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; and 
(2)	Automobile Coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; and
(3)	A $3,000,000.00 Umbrella Coverage; and
(4)	Workers Compensation and Disability: Statutory amounts.
(B)	For a Wireless Telecommunications Facility on Clay County property, the Commercial General Liability insurance policy shall specifically include the County and its officers, commissioners, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insured. 
(C)	The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and with a Best's rating of at least A. 
(D)	The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the County with at least 30 days prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(E)	Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the County at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(F)	Before construction of a permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit shall deliver to the County a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(G)	A Certificate of Insurance that states that it is for informational purposes only and does not confer rights upon the County shall not be deemed to comply with this Section. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.25. - Indemnification. 
(A)	Any application for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities that is proposed for Clay County property, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the Ordinance, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the County, and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising there from, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said Facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the County or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys fees, consultants fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the County. 
(B)	Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (A) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the County Government itself applies for and secures a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.26. - Fines. 
(A)	In the event of a violation of this Ordinance or any Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the County may impose and collect, and the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall pay to the County, fines or penalties as set forth below. 
(B)	If the holder of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit fails to comply with provisions of this Ordinance such shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation following due and proper notice and, further, each day or part thereof that a violation remains uncured after proper notice shall constitute a separate violation, punishable separately. 
(C)	Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this Ordinance or any section of this Ordinance. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit to termination and revocation of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit. The County may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this Ordinance, without limiting other remedies available to the County. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.27. - Default and/or revocation. 
If a Wireless Telecommunications Facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, then the County shall notify the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit in writing of such violation. A Permit holder in violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as in Section 155.26 and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the County in a reasonable period of time the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit is subject to revocation. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.28. - Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)	The owner of any tower or wireless facility shall be required to provide a minimum of 30 days' written notice to the County Clerk prior to abandoning any tower or wireless facility. 
(B)	Under the following circumstances, the County may determine that the health, safety and welfare interests of the County warrant and require the removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(1)	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e., not used as Wireless Telecommunications Facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days; 
(2)	Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
(3)	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, or any other necessary authorization and the Special Permit may be revoked. 
(C)	If the County makes such a determination as noted in subsection (A) of this section, then the County shall notify the holder of the Tall Structure that said Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are to be removed, the County may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(D)	The holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the County. However, if the owner of the property upon which the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the County. 
(E)	If Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the County may order officials or representatives of the County to remove the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities at the sole expense of the owner or Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit holder. 
(F)	If, the County removes, or causes to be removed, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and the owner of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the County may take steps to declare the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components. 
(G)	Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, the County may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, for no more than 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be developed by the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, subject to the approval of the County, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit and the County. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the County may take possession of and dispose of the affected Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in the manner provided in this Section and utilize the bond in Section 155.28. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.29. - Relief. 
Any Applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this Ordinance may request such at the pre-Application meeting; provided that, the relief or exemption is contained in the submitted Application for either a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit a request for modification of its Tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the Applicant to prove. The Applicant shall bear all costs of the County in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the Applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the County, its residents or other service providers. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.30. - Periodic regulatory review by the Clay County Board of Commissioners. 
(A)	The Clay County Board of Commissioners may at any time conduct a review and examination of this entire Ordinance. 
(B)	If after such a periodic review and examination of this Ordinance, the Clay County Board of Commissioners determines that one or more provisions of this Ordinance should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the Clay County Board of Commissioners may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable Ordinance in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the County, the Clay County Board of Commissioners may repeal this entire Ordinance at any time. 
(C)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, the Clay County Board of Commissioners may at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by Federal, State, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.31. - Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
(A)	To the extent that the holder of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate State and/or Federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any State or Federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(B)	To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any State or Federal agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the holder of such a Tall Structure Permit or Co-location Permit shall conform the permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.32. - Conflict with other laws. 
Where this Ordinance differs or conflicts with other Laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the County, State or federal government, this Ordinance shall apply. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.33. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage, pursuant to applicable legal and procedural requirements. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Sec. 155.34. - Authority. 
This Local Ordinance is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the State and federal government. 
(Res. No. 10-085, § 1, 12-7-2010)
Chapter 156 - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 156.001. - Title and application. 
This regulation shall be known as the Nuisance Ordinance of Clay County, and shall be enforced as provided in the respective article contained herein. The ordinance shall apply to all zoned properties with the exception of agricultural properties. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.002. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the county or its police jurisdiction that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to others or is manifestly injurious to the public health or safety or tends to corrupt the manners or morals of the people. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.003. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.004. - Definitions enumerated. 
(a)	Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind into any street, alley or public place or upon any adjacent lot or ground shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)	Certain weeds. Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other similar weeds found growing in any lot or tract of land in the county not zoned for agricultural use shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(c)	Maximum height of plants permitted. Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, cultivated plants or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the county not zoned for agricultural use shall constitute a public nuisance. Trees, bushes, flowers and other ornamental plants shall not be allowed to become overgrown in any areas not zoned for agricultural purposes. Allowing yards to become overgrown shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(d)	Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare shall constitute a public nuisance in any area not zoned for agricultural products. 
(e)	Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, including dog kennels or runs, and all other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate shall constitute a public nuisance. Enclosures in this section shall not include commercial agricultural operations. 
(f)	Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, construction and demolition materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement, tree and yard clippings, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash is a menace to public health and safety in the county and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.005. - Abatement authorized. 
The chief building official or his designee is hereby designated as the public officer to enforce this division and is authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the county, whether or not such nuisance is specifically recognized by this division. Whenever any nuisance exists within the unincorporated area of the county or upon any property of the county, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property in the unincorporated areas of Clay County that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the county and the owner or person responsible for the nuisance refuses or fails after due notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the public officer shall issue a summons and cause it to be served upon such owner and all parties in interest (O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12), stating the condition complained of and the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the magistrate's court at a time, date and place stated in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, abated or removed. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.006. - Service of process. 
Service of summons shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the county, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.007. - Order for abatement. 
If the magistrate at the hearing determines that a condition does exist as alleged, that constitutes a nuisance or a condition that under the ordinances of the county is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the magistrate shall issue his order and judgment so finding, and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate such condition within a period of time to be fixed by the magistrate. This order shall further provide how the condition is to be abated. This order shall further provide that if the property owner or responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the county, its officers and employees, shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property or responsible party in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. Execution shall issue as in the case of county taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of such execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of county taxes. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to such person at that address by certified mail return receipt requested. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.008. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist that constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, such condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.009. - Practices and procedures. 
(a)	Unauthorized storage declared nuisance. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this division is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the board of commissioners or their designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this division. Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying a residence, apartment, duplex, or other dwelling, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter, solid wastes, household trash, garbage and other wastes and dispose of the same by depositing in a public landfill, public dumpster or public compactor. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in as litter-free condition as reasonably practicable. 
(b)	Appliances. It shall be unlawful to leave any appliance outside any building or on a lot accessible to children. 
(c)	Accumulation of litter. No owner or occupant of any property in the county shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion, and debris to accumulate thereon. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Secs. 156.010—156.099. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNK VEHICLES 

Sec. 156.100. - Definitions. 
Inoperative shall mean not capable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle, or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle. 
Junked motor vehicle is any motor vehicle, as defined in this division, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The absence of a current car tag or decal from any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
Motor vehicle is any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, four wheelers, campers and trailers, as well as any part or parts thereof. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private property shall mean any real property within the county which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.101. - Declared nuisance. 
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within any residential or commercial zoning district or within 500 feet of those zoning districts of the unincorporated areas of the county for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of a junked motor vehicle, or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accord with the provisions of this division. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.102. - Exemptions. 
Those vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this division are as follows: 
(1)	Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; 
(2)	Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; 
(3)	Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health; 
(4)	Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; 
(5)	Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition, provided they are: 
a.	Limited to no more than two in number;
b.	Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles;
c.	Not visible from any road.
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.103. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the code enforcement officer that any nuisance as defined in this division exists in the county, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the real property where the nuisance exists, upon the owner of the property, and upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle or other property which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing its removal within 30 days. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigation, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the nuisance exists, and upon the junked motor vehicle itself. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.104. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon such notice, the owner of the junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 30-day time period provided in the notice, the public officer shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner or owners in the magistrate court of the county. Such service shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.105. - Hearing. 
(a)	At the hearing, the court shall determine the owner of the vehicle and whether or not a nuisance exists and, if so, the court shall order abatement of such nuisance and shall impose such penalty or penalties as may be authorized by this Code section for failure to abate such nuisance. 
(b)	In the event that the court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement thereof is ordered, the court shall be authorized to grant the owner a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate such nuisance. The court shall further include in its order provisions authorizing the county to abate such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time period for such abatement as ordered by the court. Such order shall also include authority for the county to enter upon the premises upon which the nuisance exists and abate the same, and shall further provide that the cost of abatement of the nuisance incurred by the county shall be assessed against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance existed. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Sec. 156.106. - Abatement by the county. 
In the event that the nuisance is abated by the county pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this division, the county shall abate the nuisance in the following manner: 
(1)	The county shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility. 
(2)	The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the motor vehicle within ten days of removal of the property of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the owner. 
(3)	In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time as may be established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover its costs and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Secs. 156.107—156.199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 156.200. - Penalty for failure to abate. 
Violations of this ordinance shall subject the violator to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the common jail of the county for a period not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Res. of 7-5-2011)
Secs. 156.201—156.299. - Reserved. 
Chapter 157 - REQUIRED CERTIFICATION, MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS 

Sec. 157.001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of Clay County, Georgia. 
Building Inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the county building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this Ordinance, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of Condition Bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by subsections 157.003(a)(1) and (2) of this Ordinance reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the County. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of Clay County, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
For purposes of this definition, no manufactured home (as defined immediately above, may be attached to any other Manufactured Home by means of breeze way, corridor or hallway. 
All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et seq. Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.002. - Conditions. 
(a)	All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(b)	All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et seq.
(c)	Reserved.
(d)	Manufactured homes shall not be used as storage buildings.
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.003. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. All permits shall be issued within three days of receipt of all items listed in subsections (a)(1)—(4) of this Section. 
(a)	Permit. To obtain a permit, Applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
(1)	An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
(2)	Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of Section 157.004 of this Ordinance; 
(3)	A $100.00 refundable cash deposit;
(4)	The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this Section; and
(5)	A copy of the bill of sale or title evidencing title in the applicant.
(b)	Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, Applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)	Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the Applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this Ordinance have been met. 
(d)	Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the County to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one followup inspection. The applicant shall be charged $35.00 for each additional followup inspection that may be necessary. 
(e)	Alternative Inspection. At the request of the Applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the county. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.004. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(a)	HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(b)	Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)	Exterior Condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)	Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)	Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(f)	Electrical Systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(g)	Hot Water Supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)	Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)	Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)	Smoke Detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(k)	Asbestos. All trailers (Manufactured Houses) to be inspected for asbestos from 1985 and earlier. Shall meet County Health Department Code for occupancy. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.005. - Manufactured home lot, ownership. 
(a)	All manufactured home locations must meet the Planning and Zoning requirements as defined in the Clay County Code of Ordinances and the Official Code of Georgia Annotated on lot size and occupancy limits. 
(b)	Property Ownership:
(1)	If the permit applicant is the property owner, the application must include a copy of the deed or plat. 
(2)	If the permit applicant is not the property owner, the application must include a copy of the lease or license agreement from the property owner. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.006. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)	The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.007. - Penalties. 
(a)	Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. Each day any violation under this Ordinance continues shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by a fine of $10.00 for each day. 
(b)	Violators may appeal for an extension of time to meet this requirement which may be granted at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.008. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are repealed, except that nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to permit the location of manufactured homes in areas where they are not authorized by applicable zoning and land use regulations. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
Sec. 157.009. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this Ordinance be rendered invalid by a court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the County Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. No. 11-012, § 1, 7-5-2011)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of the ordinances and resolutions of the County deemed suitable for codification. Ordinances and resolutions not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 