THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF JOHNSON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2007 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
JOHNSON, GEORGIA 
(2015) 
____________ 
James L. McAfee Jr., Chairman, District 2 
Jack Foskey, Vice-Chairman, District 5 
Larry Pope, District 4 
Jerronney (Ron) Darrisaw, District 3 
Felice Pullen, District 1 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Guy Singletary 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Leon Green 
County Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
JOHNSON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
James McAfee Jr. 
Jack Foskey 
Larry Pope 
John Pullen 
Bruce Veal 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Douglas R. Eaves 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Jud Green 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code and ordinances and resolutions subsequently adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance or resolution included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was prepared under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Doug Eaves, County Administrator, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances that will make the active law of Johnson County, Georgia, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Johnson County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Johnson County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Johnson County, Georgia. 2007. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I contains selected state laws of local application as requested by the county. Amendments to the original acts are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Unless otherwise noted, section catchlines have been supplied by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Formal citations should be to the original act and not to this compilation. 

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 269), p. 887, as amended, that created the board of commissioners of the county. This act amended, revised, superseded and consolidated former laws pertaining to the governing authority of the county. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the terms "roads and revenues" and "roads and bridges" have been stricken from the name of the governing authority. 

Sec. 1. - Creation; number of members. 
Those members of the board of commissioners of Johnson County who are serving as such immediately prior to the effective date of this section shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2005, the board of commissioners of Johnson County shall consist of five members who shall be elected as described in [§ 2]. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512) 
Sec. 2. - Districts. 
For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Johnson County is divided into five commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The five commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in the Redistricting Plan Components Report identified as Plan Name: johnson3 Plan Type: Local User: staff Administrator: Johnson Co. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512) 
Sec. 3. - Members—Eligibility. 
No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 or any other general law applicable to that office. 
In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that commissioner district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from a commissioner district must attain residency in the district the person seeks to represent at least by the time the person qualifies as a candidate for the position and must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with ch. 2, title 21, O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 2-21-1 et seq.], the Georgia Election Code. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512) 
Sec. 4. - Successors in office. 
It is further provided that all county commissioners of Johnson County, Georgia holding office at the time of the approval of this Act shall continue to hold office and function until their successors named in this Act are commissioned and duly qualified. 
Sec. 5. - Terms; time of election. 
Members of the board representing Commission Districts 1 and 5 shall be elected at the November general election in 2004, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for initial terms of office of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Members of the board representing Commission Districts 2, 3, and 4 shall be elected at the November general election in 2004, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for initial terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. All future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 341), p. 4677; 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512) 
Sec. 6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 6 was effectively repealed by 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512. 
Sec. 7. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties each member of the Board of Commissioners of Johnson County shall give bond in the sum of three thousand ($3000.00) dollars each, with some responsible surety company authorized to do business in Georgia as his surety payable to the Ordinary [probate court] of said county and his successors in office and approved by the Ordinary [probate court] of said County and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the true accounting of all money, funds, and effects of said county going into their hands or coming under their direction. Such bond to be filed in the office of the Ordinary [probate court] and be there recorded and safely kept. The premiums on said bond shall be paid by the county out of its funds. 
Sec. 8. - Oath of office. 
In addition to the oath required of all county officers, such commissioners shall take an additional oath to perform the duties of their office truly and faithfully to the best of their skill and knowledge, and to account for all money, property and effects, of said County, going into their possession, custody or control and/or expended by or under their direction. 
Sec. 9. - Vacancies in office. 
Vacancies occurring on the board for any reason shall be filled by the remaining members of the board electing a successor to serve for the unexpired term. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 2602) 
Sec. 10. - Meetings; chairman; vice-chairman; voting. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said Board of Commissioners, shall hold a regular meeting in each month on the first Tuesday thereof, except in January after their election and qualification, when they shall hold a regular meeting on the first work day of January and transact whatever business they see fit and proper. This meeting in no way to conflict with or affect the regular meeting to be held in said month on the first Tuesday. At this meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Board of Commissioners shall organize by electing one of the members as Chairman, one as Vice-Chairman, and every year thereafter a Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected, and nothing herein shall prevent any Chairman or Vice-Chairman from succeeding himself. The Vice-Chairman shall in the absence or disqualification of the chairman or during the vacancy in office of the chairman, perform and discharge all the duties of the chairman, and in the event of a vacancy in the office of the chairman or vice-chairman the same shall be filled by the board at the next regular meeting after such vacancy becomes known. The Chairman shall be the chief executive of the Board. He shall see that all orders, resolutions and rules of said Board are faithfully filled and impartially executed and enforced, and that all the officers, employees and agents of said Board faithfully and impartially discharge the duties required of them. He shall have the general supervision of the affairs of the county, acting under orders of the Board, and shall preside at all meetings of the Board. He shall have the power to convene the Board in extra session upon his own motion, or upon the written request of the other two members of the Board, and shall do so whenever the other two members of the Board shall make such request in writing. Any two members of said Board shall constitute a quorum, but the Chairman is required to vote on all questions when present at the meetings. The vote of any two members shall constitute a majority, and shall be sufficient to decide any question or matter by said Board. 
Editor's note— 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3512, increased the number of commissioners from three to five as stated in section 1. 
Sec. 11. - Compensation. 
The chairman of said board shall receive an annual salary of three thousand three hundred ($3,300) dollars and the other members of said board shall receive an annual salary of three thousand ($3,000) dollars. In addition to their salaries, the chairman shall receive an expense allowance of four hundred ($400) dollars per month, the vice-chairman shall receive three hundred seventy-five ($375) dollars, and each of the other members of the board shall receive an expense allowance of three hundred fiftty ($350) dollars per month. Such salaries and expense allowances shall be paid monthly out of the general funds of the county. Shall it be necessary for any member of said board to transact business for the county outside the limits of said County of Johnson, then his or their actual expenses shall also be paid out of the general funds of the county. Commissioners who have completed certified county commissioner training are entitled to a supplement of one hundred ($100) dollars perm onth in addition to whatever other compensation they receive (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-27). All salaries of county commissioner are entitled to annual cost-of-living adjustments. Commissioners may receive group healthand other employment benefits. (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-5-28, 36-1-11.1) 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 94), p. 2317; 1958 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 2911; 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 458), p. 3236; 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 2602; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), p. 2633; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 522), p. 3863; Ord. of 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 12. - Clerk—Compensation; bond; duties. 
[The] Board of Commissioners of their first regular meeting on the first Tuesday after this Bill has been enacted into law, and their qualification as Commissioner of Johnson County, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and at the first meeting in each year thereafter elect a Clerk of said Board. The salary of said Clerk shall be fixed by said Board not to exceed $50.00 per month. Said Clerk before entering upon his duties shall give bond in the sum of One Thousand ($1000.00) Dollars to be approved by said Board of Commissioners, the premium of said bond, if any, to be paid by the County out of the general fund, and said bond to be payable to the Ordinary [probate court] of said County and his successors in office, and conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as such clerk and to account for any and all funds, property or effects which may come into his hands as such Clerk, which said bond shall be filed with the Ordinary [probate court] of said County, and recorded on his minutes, and may be sued on in like manner as the bonds of said Commissioners. He shall keep minutes of all meetings of said Board of Commissioners, and an inventory of all properties, and such books and records as may be required of him by said Board of Commissioners, and do such other acts and things as may be required of him by law as such Clerk. Said Board of Commissioners shall or may discharge said Clerk at any time and elect a successor. 
Sec. 13. - Competitive bids for purchases. 
It shall be the duty of said Board of Commissioners of Johnson County to make all purchases and contracts of purchase in excess of the sum of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars upon a strictly competitive basis, and to this end said Board or the Clerk thereof, under the direction of said Board shall prepare monthly requirements of the county's needs, and post them on the bulletin board in the court house, or publish same in some newspaper as they see fit and proper, inviting bids upon the proposed purchases, stating the time and place of the opening of said bids and the making of said purchases; that said bids shall be received unopened and shall not be opened until the specified time and place, and at such time and place said bids shall be opened publicly, and the contract for purchasing said supplies shall be to the lowest and best bidder and the supplies purchased therefrom; provided however, should any machinery or equipment of said county which at the time is being used upon any public work suffer a breakdown, requiring purchase of new parts or mechanical repair, that in such case the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of said County shall be relieved of the above provisions, and shall be authorized to purchase such parts or make such repairs under such conditions as they see fit and proper. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 333), p. 5301) 
Editor's note— The provisions of section 2-51 of the Johnson County Code of Ordinances expand on the purchasing methods of 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 333), p. 5301, § 13). 
Sec. 14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 14 was repealed by 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 214), p. 890. 
Sec. 15. - Board approval of purchases. 
All purchases of equipment, material, and supplies necessary for said county, before the same shall be paid for, must be approved by the Board of Commissioners at a regular meeting of said Board and said approval be endorsed on said bill and when this is done warrants therefor shall be regularly drawn, which warrant shall be signed by the Chairman and the Clerk as all other warrants drawn on the Treasury before payment thereof is made, except that in the absence of the Chairman, said vice-chairman shall be authorized to sign said warrant. 
Sec. 16. - Superintendent—Appointment; duties. 
[The] Board of Commissioners may at their discretion and when they deem necessary elect a superintendent. Said superintendent shall also be convict warden. Said superintendent shall give his entire time to said duties as such superintendent and warden. He shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the Board of Commissioners and shall hold his position at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 17. - Audits; inspection of books and accounts. 
[Johnson County] shall secure the services of a competent public accountant of this State to audit the books and records of the Board of Commissioners for the County of Johnson as of the close of business on February 28, 1945 and shall cause to be published in the newspaper in which the Sheriff's advertisements for Johnson County are published the results of said audit sufficient to show the actual financial condition of Johnson County at that time by showing the actual balance of cash on hand, or deficit, as the case may be, the cost of said audit and the cost of publishing to be paid by the County Commissioners of said County out of County funds. Not later than the fifteenth day of each and every month thereafter said Commissioners shall cause to be published in said newspaper a complete list of all receipts and disbursements of moneys or its equivalent by said Commissioners for the County of Johnson for the previous month, giving the sources from where received, the different amounts paid out for what purpose paid, to whom paid, and showing the balance of cash on hand, or the deficit, as the case may be. 
[The] Board of Commissioners shall enter on the minutes of the Board, a copy of each and every report so made and cause to be filed in the Ordinary's office of Johnson County one copy of each of said reports as a public record and to pay the cost of publishing of said reports out of County funds not to exceed twenty (20) cents per column inch for said publications. 
[The] Board of Commissioners shall as early as practical, after the passage and approval of this Act, have the books and accounts of the Tax Collector, the County School Superintendent, the County Treasurer, the Sheriff, the Ordinary and all custodians of Johnson County funds audited as of December 31, 1944 and every calendar year thereafter (except the Tax Collector which shall be as of April 20, of each year) by a certified public accountant of this State. Said audits shall be filed in the office of the Board of Commissioners of said County and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any citizen or taxpayer of Johnson County. 
(1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 214), p. 890) 
Editor's note— Section 17 was repealed by 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 214), p. 890, and the language included herein as section 17 was substituted. For stylistic purposes, the section numbers of the repealing act are omitted. 
Sec. 18. - Duties and responsibilities of board. 
The said Board of Commissioners shall have, and they are hereby vested with exclusive jurisdiction and control over, the following to-wit: In directing, controlling, and caring for all the property of the county according to law; in levying taxes according to law; in establishing, altering, or abolishing public roads, private roads, private ways, bridges, and ferries, according to law; in establishing abolishing, or changing election precincts and militia districts according to law; in supervising the tax collector or commissioners books; and in allowing the insolvent lists, for said county according to law; in settling all claims against the county; examining and auditing all claims and accounts of officers having the care, management, keeping, collecting, or disbursement of money belonging to the county, or appropriating for its use or benefit, and bringing them to settlement; and especially are they charged with frequently examining and auditing the books of all officers through whose hands any county funds must pass; they may require from all such officers, subject to an examination, such reports, as may be necessary to keep such Board of Commissioners, fully informed at all times, of the financial condition of the county; in controlling, caring for and managing the convicts of the county, according to law; in making rules regulations and provisions for the support of the poor of the county, according to law; in promoting and preserving the public health of the county, with authority to quarantine against contagious diseases and epidemics, according to law; in regulating and fixing licenses fees as may be provided for; and generally to have and exercise all powers heretofore vested in the Ordinary [probate court] of said county when sitting for county purposes; and to exercise such other powers as are granted by law or as may be indispensable to the jurisdiction over county matters or county finance, in selecting and appointing all minor officers of the county whose election or appointment is not otherwise fixed by law, such as superintendent and guards of convicts and chain-gang, janitor of the court-house, superintendent of pauper farm should one be established, county physician and health officer, tax assessors, and county policement; and other officers and guards as needed and authorized by law; and regulating peddling license according to law and such Board shall have the authority to employ a competent attorney-at-law, resident of the county, as county attorney to advise the Board of Commissioners and represent the county in such matters as the Board of Commissioners may direct, who shall be paid such salary or compensation as the Board of Commissioners may direct, out of the regular funds of the county, with authority of said Board of Commissioners to fix his term of office or to discharge him at any time. Relationship of said attorney to any Board member shall not be a disqualification of said attorney to serve as county attorney. Said Board shall have entire control of the convicts of said county sentenced to work upon the roads or works of said county by the proper authorities of the State assigned to the county by proper authorities of the State, and shall so employ them according to law, and under such plans of working, building, repairing, and maintaining the public roads, bridges and works of said county as may now or hereafter be adopted or enforced by law in said county. The said Board shall also have the right and authority to discontinue the chain-gang, and to let the misdemeanor convicts sentenced in the local courts to other counties under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the said Board and approved by the Prison Commission of Georgia, and shall also have the right to reassign to some other Georgia County, Johnson county's felony convicts under the sanction and rules of said Prison Commission of Georgia. 
Sec. 19. - Acceptance of contributions. 
Board of Commissioners may receive contributions for the improvement of the public roads or bridges of the county from persons who own property along the same, or from any other person or persons, or from the State Government, or the United States government or from any corporation or firm who may be interested in the improvement of the roads and bridges, and such contributions when received shall be used for the improvement of the road or bridges designated by the contributor. 
Sec. 20. - Conflicts of interest. 
It shall be unlawful for any member of said Board or the Clerk of said Board to have any financial interest in sale or purchase of any article to or from the county, or to have any financial interest in the purchase or sale of any indebtedness, or evidence of indebtedness, that may be owing to the County, or owed by the County, or to receive from any person any rebate, expense account, transportations, or other valuable consideration in connection with or through the purchase of any equipment, materials or supplies for the county, or the purchase or sale of any indebtedness of or to said county, or the awarding of any contract for said County; and if any commissioner or member of said Board, or the Clerk of said Board, shall knowingly or willfully violate any provision of this section he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed by [law] and shall forfeit his office or be discharged from employment. 
Sec. 21. - Judicial authority. 
At the regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners, they shall be clothed with the power of the court, subject to the same rules that govern, define and control the powers of the court of Ordinary [probate court], when sitting for county purposes. 
Sec. 22, 23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 22, concerning effective date of the act, is omitted. Section 23, an erroneous duplication section 22, is also omitted. 
Sec. 24. - Treasurer. 
The county Commissioners shall appoint a County Treasurer, either a Corporation or an individual, and may require said County Treasurer to give such bond as such Commissioners may assess. Said County Treasurer may be a banking Corporation or an individual, as they see fit. The term of said County Treasurer shall be fore one year, and until it, or his successor is appointed and qualified. 
Sec. 25. - Purchasing agent; supplies. 
[The] Board of Commissioners shall be the purchasing agent for said county of Johnson, which shall include all supplies and/or fixtures of every kind that are to be paid for with county funds. No purchase or purchases shall be made by said Board, except at a regular meeting of the Board at which a majority of members are present, and upon approval by a majority of members are present, and upon approval by a majority of those present. Provided, however, the Board may permit said officers of Johnson County to purchase supplies for their respective office, in amounts not to exceed three hundred ($300.00) dollars for any one month. Requisitions for supplies must be submitted to said Board in writing, which requisition shall be considered only at a regular meeting of the Board. Provided, however, that in event of an emergency the Chairman, by and with consent of one member, may make purchases to supply emergency. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 333), p. 5301) 
Editor's note— The provisions of Ch. 2, Art. X, of the Johnson County Code of Ordinances expand on the purchasing provisions of 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 333), p. 5301). 
Sec. 26. - Treasurer—Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for the County Treasurer be it a banking corporation or an individual, to receive directly or indirectly any rebate discount, or profit on any county warrant or order paid by the county of Johnson; and any violation of the provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed by [law], and shall forfeit his office. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1999 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 102), p. 4046, creating a board of elections and registration for the county. 

Sec. 1. - Creation of board. 
Pursuant to the authorization contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b), there is created a Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration and said board is empowered with the powers and duties of the election superintendent relating to the conduct of elections and with the powers and duties of the board of registrars relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures in and for Johnson County, Georgia. 
For the purposes of this Act, the terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the meanings ascribed to those words by Code Sec. 21-2-2 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-2], unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act; the term "board" means the Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration created by subsection (a) of this section; the term "county" means Johnson County; and the term "superior court" means the Superior Court of Johnson County. 
Sec. 2. - Members; appointment; terms. 
The Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration shall be composed of four members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of Johnson County, and who shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board of Commissioners of Johnson County. In making the initial appointments to the board, the members shall be selected at least 30 days prior to January 1, 2000. Two initial members shall be appointed for terms of two years and two initial members shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. All successors shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The term of each initial member shall commence on January 1, 2000. 
The board of elections and registration shall select one of their members as superintendent of elections and that person shall be the administrator and chief executive officer of the board. 
Sec. 3. - Members prohibited from holding elective office. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
Sec. 4. - Certification of appointment. 
The Board of Commissioners of Johnson County shall certify the appointment of each member by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 5. - Successive terms; resignation; removal. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve successive terms, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing body and to the clerk of the superior court, and shall be subject to removal from the board by the appointing body at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any appointed member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the governing authority of Johnson County shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Sec. 2 of this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 7. - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 8. - Rules and regulations; meetings; minutes; contracts. 
The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings and shall meet not fewer than six times per year. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the superintendent of elections or any two members. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Johnson County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 9. - Salaries. 
The superintendent of elections shall receive $100.00 per month as compensation for carrying out the duties prescribed by this Act and the other members of the board of elections and registration shall receive $50.00 per month as compensation for carrying out their duties as members of said board; said compensation to be paid from county funds. The compensation of the chief deputy registrar shall be $200.00 per month to be paid from county funds. The compensation of clerical assistants and other employees of the board of elections and registration shall be fixed by the board subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners of Johnson County. 
Sec. 10. - Powers and duties. 
The Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration shall be empowered with all powers and duties relating to the conduct of elections as election superintendent pursuant to provisions of The Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration is empowered with all of the powers and duties relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures as board of registrars pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 21. This Act is intended to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b) and shall be construed liberally so as to effectuate that purpose. 
The board shall propose an annual budget to the county governing authority for approval or negotiation detailing the expenditures necessary for the execution of its duties. 
Sec. 11. - Superintendent of elections; duties. 
The superintendent of elections shall be the chief executive officer and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 12. - Offices; supplies; equipment. 
The Board of Commissioners of Johnson County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the Board of Commissioners of Johnson County shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 13. - Probate judge relieved of election duties. 
Except for the appointment of initial members of the Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration as provided in Sec. 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective on January 1, 2000. On January 1, 2000, the judge of the probate court of Johnson County shall be relieved of all powers and duties relative to elections to which the Johnson County Board of Elections and Registration succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board of elections and registration all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, and records pertaining to such powers and duties. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local Acts printed in Part I and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections constitute and are designated as "The Code of Ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia" and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction; definitions. 
(a)  Applicability. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(4)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
(c)  Definitions and conventions. 
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the governing authority is used in this Code it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire body. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners, commissioner. The terms "board," "board of commissioners," "commissioner," "commissioners," and "sole commissioner" refer to the governing authority of Johnson County, Georgia, whether a sole commissioner or a board of commissioners as the case may be from time to time. 
Charter. The term "charter" means the Johnson County Charter, as amended. 
City, city council. The terms "city" and "city council" refer to the city of Wrightsville, Georgia, which is the county seat of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of Ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either . . . or," or "neither . . . nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either . . . or" and "neither . . . nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" refers to Johnson County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires a county officer or employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Department; board; agency. The name or title of any department, board, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the term "of Johnson County, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" refers to the Johnson County Fire Department or any fire department that provides services to Johnson County, Georgia. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officials, officers, etc. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of Johnson County, Georgia" were added thereto. References to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies by title only shall be construed as referring to the officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the governing body concerning a topic of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" includes individuals and any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, body politic and corporate, or any combination thereof. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the governing body regarding a topic of special or temporary character. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sheriff, sheriff's department. The terms "sheriff" and "sheriff's department" refer to the Office of the Sheriff of Johnson County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, court, circle, way, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto and area owned or dedicated as public right-of-way, within the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Will. The term "will" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, numbers, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Construction of statute, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceedings pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows: _______." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commissioners. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8 of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Penalties for violation of Code. 
(a)  In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the county to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the county officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  All fines shall be paid into the county treasury. 
(i)  In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(j)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of Georgia, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60; additional penalties in certain traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the county; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the county; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the county; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the county; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(13)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(14)  Any resolution of the county not in conflict with this Code. 
All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Copy of Code to be maintained in clerk's office. 
A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the county administrator preserved in loose-leaf form or in such other form as the county commissioners may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the county administrator, or someone authorized by the clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the county commissioners to make the same a part of such Code when the same has been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the county commissioners. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
(Code 2002, ch. 1, § 7) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-19. - Open meetings. 
The county board of commissioners has determined that well-organized meetings allow a board of commissioners to reach decisions in a fair and consistent manner, that efficiency is served when the process of planning for and conducting public meetings is clearly stated and understood by public officials and citizens, and public participation and access to the governmental decision making process is a key element of our democratic system. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-01) 
State Law reference— Open meeting required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-20. - Number of commissioners; quorum; voting. 
The county board of commissioners consists of five commissioners. Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum. A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present at a meeting at which a quorum is present. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, §§ 1-02, 1-03) 
Sec. 2-21. - Chairman; vice-chairman. 
The board shall select a chairman and vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. The chairman may participate in all deliberations and make, second, and vote on all motions to come before the commission. The chairman shall have the same and equal rights as any other member of the board to fully participate in the legislative process of county government. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-04) 
Sec. 2-22. - Agenda. 
(a)  The county administrator, with the advice of the chairman and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners and to the public at some time during the week immediately prior to the meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. This request must be submitted in writing to the county administrator and received at least three business days before the meeting. 
(c)  A new subject that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. 
(d)  When a motion before the board is defeated, a motion regarding the same or a substantially similar subject may not be raised before the board for a period of six months from the date of its defeat without unanimous consent of the board. 
(e)  The agenda for the regular monthly session is to be closed on the first Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 5; Res. of 1-12-2001) 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-23. - Public comments. 
All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county administrator at least three business days before the board meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-08) 
Sec. 2-24. - Repetitious complaints. 
Persons will be limited to one appearance during a six-month period before the board of commissioners for a specific complaint. A request by or for that person to be heard again on the same issue must be approved by a majority of board members. The board may set a time limit on the presentation of any person. 
(Res. of 8-9-1999) 
Sec. 2-25. - Minutes. 
(a)  A summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting must be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of a meeting. The secretary of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting and such records shall be open to public inspection once approved as official by the board, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. 
(b)  Minutes must, as a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote the name of each person voting for or against a proposal must be recorded. In all other cases it shall be presumed that the action taken was approved by each person in attendance unless the minutes reflect the name of the persons voting against the proposal or abstaining. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-06) 
State Law reference— Minutes of county governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-25. 
Sec. 2-26. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Minutes read; 
(3)  Approval of bills; 
(4)  Invited guests; 
(5)  Reports from committees and departments; 
(6)  Old business; 
(7)  New business; 
(8)  Public comments; and 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-07) 
Sec. 2-27. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the second Monday. All regular meetings shall be held in the Grand Jury Room of the county courthouse. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the county courthouse. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-09; Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-28. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of two commissioners. Written notice of meeting must be posted at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the legal organ of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-10) 
Sec. 2-29. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. Notice shall be provided to the legal organ of the county as soon as possible. Notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. The reason for holding the meeting within 24 hours and the nature of the notice must be recorded in the minutes. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-10) 
Sec. 2-30. - Executive or closed meetings. 
A meeting or portion of a meeting may be closed to the public to discuss any matter that is exempted by the open meetings law. The specific reason for such closure must be entered upon the official minutes of the meeting. The meeting cannot be closed to the public except by a majority vote of a quorum present for the meeting. The minutes must reflect the names of the members present and the names of those voting for closure. The chairperson must execute and file with the official minutes of the meeting a notarized affidavit stating under oath that the subject matter of the meeting was devoted to matters with the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exception. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Procedure for closing meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-31. - Smoke-free facility. 
(a)  The county provides a smoke-free environment in the county courthouse. The county courthouse is clearly designated by a "No Smoking" sign, and there shall be no smoking in the courthouse. This policy is applicable to all elected officials, employees, and visitors in the courthouse. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Res. of 12-9-1996; Res. of 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 2-32. - Committees. 
(a)  The chairman, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committee may make recommendations to the board of commissioners, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. 
(b)  Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of the board. The chairman shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1-12) 
Secs. 2-33—2-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS 

Sec. 2-53. - Term of office. 
Each appointment or reappointment to the county board of assessors will be for a term of three years. The terms of a voting majority of the board of assessors may not expire in the same calendar year. Staggered initial appointments or reappointments of a duration of not less than three nor more than six years may be made to prevent such an occurrence. If a term expires and that member is not reappointed, they will continue to serve until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(Res. of 2-12-2001) 
Secs. 2-54—2-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERNAL CONTROLS 

Sec. 2-80. - Objectives. 
The county board of commissioners has established internal control processes in order to protect the assets of the citizens of the county and to provide for reasonable assurances that the government of the county is operating in an efficient and effective manner. To that end, the county charges the county administrator to develop policies and procedures sufficient to achieve the following objectives with a degree of reasonable assurance: 
(1)  The county shall maintain a sufficient level of reliability in financial reporting to ensure that the citizens and financial partners have a true and accurate picture of the county's financial and economic condition. 
(2)  The county, in order to protect the taxpayers of the county from unreasonable taxation and to provide adequate services to the county, shall develop policies and procedures to ensure an effective and efficient manner of governmental operations. 
(3)  The county shall conduct its affairs in compliance with all applicable county, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-1) 
Sec. 2-81. - Internal control components. 
In order to achieve the objectives of this article, the county has developed a comprehensive internal control system consisting of five interrelated components, including controlling the environment, risk assessment, controlling activities, information and communications, and a process to monitor the quality of internal control performance over time. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Sec. 2-82. - Control environment. 
The county board of commissioners and the county administrator, as management, shall establish a control environment to set an ethical tone for the governmental organization. This ethical environment will serve as the foundation for the internal control process and provide discipline and structure. Key elements of this environment should include the following: 
(1)  Management must convey to the department heads and employees a sense of conducting operations ethically as evidenced by a code of conduct or other verbal or written directives. 
(2)  Management must respect and adhere to all legal compliance requirements of the county, state and federal governments. 
(3)  The roles and responsibilities of department managers shall be clearly defined. 
(4)  Department managers must have adequate knowledge and experience to discharge their duties. 
(5)  Management must ensure that all employees have adequate knowledge and training to discharge their duties. 
(6)  Management must maintain an open-door and nonpunitive process to allow staff to communicate all instances of noncompliance to procedures or risk to assets. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Sec. 2-83. - Risk assessment. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners and the county administrator shall conduct risk assessments based on a structured approach and on a five-year cycle. The purpose of the risk assessment shall be to identify, analyze, and manage risk associated with the internal control objectives set forth in this article. All members of the organization shall participate in the risk assessment activities. 
(b)  The county administrator is charged with procuring or developing a risk assessment tool to be utilized in this process. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Sec. 2-84. - Control activities. 
(a)  The county commissioners and the county administrator shall develop policies and procedures to ensure that their directives are carried out. Key elements of control activities should include: 
(1)  Reviews of actual performance versus budget, forecast, and prior period performance to determine variations in performance, financial and operational, of the departmental and functional components of government. 
(2)  The development of a system of controls to check the accuracy, completeness, and authorization of transactions in the management information systems, to include: 
a.  Data entry checks; 
b.  Exception reporting; 
c.  Access controls; and 
d.  Review of input and output data. 
(3)  Safeguarding of assets against unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition. 
(4)  Segregation of duties to include at a minimum the separation of personnel/payroll and hiring/termination. Time cards and timesheets must be reviewed by managers before the data is entered, and employees and management must sign the document. The chairman of the county commissioners shall review, on a quarterly basis, all of the personnel salaries and wage rates. 
(5)  Expenditure activities: 
a.  Purchasing/payment. Approval for transactions that generate expenditures shall not be delegated to data entry personnel or the requesting end user. Approvals must be in writing and given by the governing authority of their designated representative. 
b.  Receipt of goods. The acknowledgement of receipt of goods shall not be the individual responsible for the ordering or purchase of those goods. 
c.  Check writing activities. The person preparing the check shall not be the person signing the check. All county checks shall require a minimum of two signatures, one of which must be a commissioner. The person signing the check shall not be the person reconciling the bank statements. Checking account reconciliations must occur within 15 days of receipt of the appropriate bank records. A staff member not primarily associated with the production of those checks must conduct the reconciliation. 
(b)  The county administrator is charged with developing a system to restrict access to county resources. 
(c)  The county administrator is charged with the preparation of an annual budget. The administrator must make available on a periodic basis a budget to actual comparative statement for the review of the county commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Sec. 2-85. - Information and communication. 
The board of commissioners and the county administrator shall endeavor to ensure that the county has a system in place to provide reasonable assurance that the identification, capture and exchange of information is provided in a form and time frame that allows people to carry out their responsibilities. The county shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Ensure adequate source documentation for all transactions; 
(2)  Provide reports on a timely basis to decision makers for review and appropriate action; 
(3)  Ensure that accurate information is available to those who need it; 
(4)  Establish a schedule of reconciliations and reviews to ensure the accuracy of reports; 
(5)  Establish internal and external communication channels; 
(6)  Ensure that employee's duties and control responsibilities are effectively communicated; and 
(7)  Establish an open and nonpunitive channel of communications that allows employees to report suspected improprieties 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Sec. 2-86. - Monitoring. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners and county administrator shall develop a process to assess the quality of internal control performance over time. Management involvement and oversight of the operations shall provide the key to determining significant variances from expectations and inaccuracies in financial data. 
(b)  The county administrator at a minimum should review all budget, financial and economic reports to provide independent reconciliations and reasonable safeguards. The administrator is charged with investigating and reporting to the county commissioners on any irregularities or deficiencies. Corrective action and followup must be installed. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8-2) 
Secs. 2-87—2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-116. - Employment policies and procedures. 
(a)  The specific personnel policies and procedures attached to this Code as appendix A have been adopted by the county and are made part of this Code as fully as if set forth in this section. 
(b)  It is the purpose of these procedures and policies to establish a guide to administrative actions concerning the various human resource activities and operations of the county and to inform the employees of their rights, benefits and responsibilities. It is the responsibility of the constitutional officers and department heads as well as the employees to insure that all employees are thoroughly knowledgeable of the contents and are aware of the conduct that is expected of them while employed by the county. Performance evaluations will reflect the employees' adherence to these policies. Every effort will be made to insure that these personnel policies are administered in a systematic, fair and impartial manner. 
Sec. 2-117. - Bond for constitutional officers. 
All deputy constitutional officers shall be required to provide a bond of sufficient security payable to the governing authority of the county in the amount of $50,000.00 for the faithful performance of their duties when they assume the responsibilities of the constitutional officer due to absence, incapacity, death or removal from office. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 2-118. - County administrator—Office created. 
The board of commissioners of the county has determined that it would be in the best interest of the county and provide for a more effective and efficient county government for the county to have a county administrator. Therefore, the board has created the office of county administrator. 
Sec. 2-119. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the county administrator specifically include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Supervising the conduct of county employees; 
(2)  Administering county laws, ordinances, regulations, and directives of the board; 
(3)  Exercising control over all county departments and agencies; 
(4)  Preparing an annual budget; 
(5)  Informing the county commissioners on a regular basis as to the financial conditions and needs of the county and maintaining accurate records reflecting the county's financial condition; 
(6)  Examining the accounts and records, of any and each, of the various county departments; 
(7)  Supervising the performance of county contracts; 
(8)  Regulating purchases of county supplies and materials; and 
(9)  Performing all other duties delegated by the county commissioners. 
(b)  The departments and agencies over which the county administrator has control include, but are not limited to, financial administration, road department, solid waste, senior center, emergency management services, emergency management agency, government buildings, recreation (shared with the board), office of the tax assessor (shared with the board), elections (shared with the board), and library (shared with the board and regional authorities). 
(c)  The county administrator shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the board from time to time, including, but not limited to, control of and responsibility for any new county departments and agencies established by the board. 
Sec. 2-120. - Authority in absence of chairman. 
If at any time the chairman of the board is not available to sign contracts, warrants, or other documents, and to act on official business, the vice-chairman will have the power and authority to sign any document and act on any official business that may arise. 
(Res. of 4-3-1973) 
Secs. 2-121—2-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY VEHICLES 

Sec. 2-139. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The county provides vehicles for use in the performance of their duties to the following persons occupying county positions: county administrator, road superintendent, code enforcement officer, sheriff, chief deputy, and deputies. 
(b)  The county has purchased liability insurance and sovereign immunity covers acts conducted in all of the above positions if the persons are within the performance of their official duties. Acts conducted in the above positions are not covered by immunity when the use of the vehicle is not within the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2005, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 2-140. - Official vehicle use. 
(a)  The county administrator and sheriff are recognized as 24-hour on-call officials and are granted unlimited nongovernmental usage of their vehicles with the presumption that they are on official duty at all times and that the use of the vehicle is within the official performance of their duties. 
(b)  The remaining positions are authorized to use their vehicles for governmental usage only, to include transportation home after their shift and to return to work for their next shift. They will be covered for call out situations. 
(c)  The sheriff shall be authorized to add or modify permissions to this article in writing. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2005, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 2-141. - Personal liability of employees. 
If a vehicle is not used within the scope of permission granted in this article, the driver of a county vehicle may be held personally liable if the limits available through the county's insurance carrier are not sufficient for any resulting loss. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2005, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 2-142. - Vehicles to be numbered. 
All county vehicles are to be assigned a number. 
(Res. of 12-14-1993) 
Secs. 2-143—2-167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-168. - Worker's compensation insurance. 
Certain elected officials of the county, while performing their elected duties, shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioner's of Georgia Group Self-Insured Worker's Compensation Fund. 
(Res. of 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-169. - Persons covered. 
(a)  Those elected officials to be covered under the worker's compensation laws of the state are: all members of the board of commissioners, the sheriff, the probate judge, the clerk of the superior court, the tax commissioner, the coroner, and the magistrate judge. 
(b)  Volunteer firemen shall be ensured under the worker's compensation laws of the state by a private insurance company. The county will assume payment of all premiums for said insurance. 
(Res. of 12-9-1996) 
Secs. 2-170—2-191. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-192. - Purpose and intent. 
The county board of commissioner has determined that its records are public property, and that some of those records contain information needed for varying lengths of time for the conduct of public business, are essential for varying lengths of time for continuity of government or for the protection of the rights and privileges of our citizens, and contain information that is essential as documentary evidence of local heritage. It is in the best interests of the citizens of the county that an efficient and cost effective records management plan be adopted and implemented which will cause any records whose usefulness has ended to be destroyed and which will cause those records which have enduring value to be preserved. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1983) 
Sec. 2-193. - Director of management activities. 
The county board of commissioners may from time to time appoint a director of records management, and the director so appointed shall serve as such at the pleasure of said commission. The director shall be authorized to act for and on behalf of the county board of commissioners in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the state records act. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1983; Res. of 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference— County records as public property; duty to adopt records management plan, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
Sec. 2-194. - Retention schedule. 
County records shall be maintained in accordance with retention schedules provided by the state, department of archives and history, and the commission shall designate a proper place where said permanent records shall be stored. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1983; Res. of 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference— Maintenance of county records, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-5 
Sec. 2-195. - Records destruction. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners has determined that all records created in county offices are not permanent records. 
(b)  All county offices will abide by the records retention schedules created by the state department of archives and history. 
(c)  Written documentation will be made of those records to be destroyed, listing the type and date of the records along with the date the records are destroyed and the method of destruction. 
(d)  The department head will sign this documentation with the original being kept in that department and a copy being kept in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  A witness must be in attendance when records are destroyed, and the witness shall sign a statement verifying the date and method of destruction. 
(Res. of 12-11-2000) 
State Law reference— Disposal of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102. 
Sec. 2-196. - Designation of county records custodian. 
The Clerk of the Johnson County Board of Commissioners, as appointed by the board from time to time, shall be the Records Custodian for Johnson County. Said records custodian shall have all authority as previously set forth in the 1999 resolution for the coordinator to direct and coordinate all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act. 
The records custodian shall maintain and store any and all records under his or her control at one or more county maintained facilities as he or she may designate from time to time. 
(Res. of 2-10-2014) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Feb. 10, 2014, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 2-196. 
Secs. 2-197—2-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BUDGETING 

Sec. 2-214. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the county shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Duty to establish fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-215. - General policies. 
(a)  The county will finance all current expenditures with current revenues. The county shall endeavor to not use shortterm borrowing to finance current operational requirements but is not prohibited by this policy from using shortterm borrowing to meet operating budget requirements. 
(b)  All governmental funds, except capital project funds, are subject to the annual budget process. Capital projects will be subject to project length budgets. 
(c)  All budgets will be adopted on a basis of accounting consistent with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Revenues will be recognized when they become measurable and available and expenditures are charged against the budget when they become measurable, a liability has been incurred, and the liability will be liquidated with current resources. Revenues will be recognized as available at the end of the year using the 60-day rule. Expenditures will be recognized at the end of the fiscal year if incurred during the fiscal year and paid with current resources. All expenditures for the purchase of inventory will be recognized using the purchase method. If the county establishes a proprietary fund, that fund shall use the consumption and FIFO method of expenditure recognition for inventories. 
(d)  The budget must be balanced for all budgeted funds. Total anticipated revenues and other resources available including unreserved fund balance must equal total estimated expenditures for each fund. 
(e)  The county will strive to integrate performance measurement and objectives and productivity indicators within the budget. 
(f)  The county will maintain a budgetary control system to ensure adherence to the budget and will prepare timely financial reports comparing actual revenues expenditures and encumbrances with budgeted amounts. 
(g)  All operating budget appropriations will lapse at year end. Encumbrances can be reappropriated in the next fiscal year by a budget amendment. Capital budget appropriations under the capital improvement program shall be appropriated with project-length balanced budget for major projects. 
(h)  The operating budget will provide for adequate maintenance and operation of capital equipment and facilities and allocate funds to the capital budget for their orderly replacement. 
(i)  The county will pay bills on the second Monday of each month. Department heads and elected officials are directed to submit payment requests within these timeframes. The county administrator shall, however, have the authority to issue special checks up to a maximum of $2,500.00. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Duty to adopt and to operate under annual balance budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-216. - Adoption and approval. 
The budget shall be adopted by the approval of a budget resolution that specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories, the proposed expenditure totals for each department, each nondepartmental expense, and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget must be approved by resolution. The budget shall be adopted at the fund/department level, which is the legal level of budgetary control. The current year's budget may be adjusted to reflect changes in local economy, changes in priorities or services needs, receipt of unbudgeted revenues and for unanticipated expenditures. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. 
Sec. 2-217. - Reserves and contingencies. 
(a)  The county will strive to include a contingency amount in the general fund budget for unforeseen or emergency operating expenditures. The amount of the contingency will be no more than three percent of the operating budget. The county will endeavor to fund contingencies from the unreserved fund balance but may use general fund appropriations until sufficient fund balance has been accrued. 
(b)  The county will strive to establish a fund balance reserve for the general fund to pay expenditures caused by unforeseen emergencies, for revenue shortfalls and to eliminate short-term borrowing for cash flow purposes or because of the schedule of tax collections. The reserve will be maintained at an amount that represents no more than $750,000.00 or three months of operating expenditures whichever is greater. 
(c)  The budget shall be adopted at the legal level of budgetary control that is the fund/department level. Transfers of nonpersonal appropriations within a department shall require only the approval of the county administrator. Transfers between departments or funds, an increase of a personal services appropriation, or an increase in the level of authorized positions shall require the approval of the board of commissioners. Department heads and elected officials are directed to operate within budget limitations to prevent emergency situations. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 2-218. - Amendments. 
County commissioners may authorize new projects or expenditures during the budget year by adopting a budget resolution that includes the project cost and revenue source. Each budget resolution must be balanced. The county commissioners shall adopt on a quarterly basis a budget amendment that incorporates all of the budget resolutions for the previous quarter. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 2-219. - Budget officer; designation and duties. 
(a)  The county administrator is designated as the budget officer for the county. He shall prepare a budget calendar, a balanced budget proposal and a budget resolution to be presented to the county commission. He shall prepare a revenue plan itemizing all anticipated county revenues. The county administrator shall be responsible for the preparation, administration and fiscal control of the budget. 
(b)  The county administrator shall utilize a decentralized budget process that gives department heads and constitutional officers the opportunity to provide input into the budget process. The department heads and constitutional officers must provide a current service level budget with a letter recommending any expanded service levels or additional personnel. 
(c)  The county administrator is charged with ensuring that the county shall comply with all state laws applicable to budget hearings, public notices, public inspection, and budget adoption. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Authorization for appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; duties of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. 
Sec. 2-220. - [Requests for expenditures.] 
The board of commissioners does hereby establish a policy that all request for assistance that will have a financial impact must be submitted in writing to the county administrator ten days before the commissioners' meeting in order to receive a budget impact statement and to allow the commissioners adequate time for the proper review and consideration. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008(2)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 17, 2008, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 2-220. 
Secs. 2-221—2-246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PURCHASE OF MATERIALS AND SERVICES 

Sec. 2-247. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the governing authority of the county to establish regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for the purchase of materials and services necessary for the effective operations of the county government and to ensure the administration of such system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-1) 
Sec. 2-248. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all departments, divisions or other units of the county government receiving appropriations from the board of county commissioners and to other agencies, as the board may deem appropriate. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-2) 
Sec. 2-249. - Purchasing agent—Designation. 
The county administrator or his designee shall serve as the purchasing agent of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-3) 
Sec. 2-250. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following authority, responsibility, and duties: 
(1)  To ensure the administration of the purchasing system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. To ensure that all due diligence is applied to the purchasing process. 
(2)  To purchase or contract for all materials, supplies and services required by the using departments and divisions of the county government pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  To purchase or procure for the county materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services from the "lowest and best bid" by a responsive and responsible bidder meeting specifications. 
(4)  To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the county who are reputable and responsible vendors of materials, supplies, and services regularly used by the county, including descriptions of their goods or services, prices, and discounts as may be available 
(5)  To sell or dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property in accordance with the ordinance rules, regulations, or resolutions which may be adopted by the county 
(6)  To coordinate cooperative purchasing practices with other governmental entities. 
(7)  To establish, and amend when necessary, as authorized, all rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-4) 
Sec. 2-251. - Purchase orders. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all purchases for materials, supplies, and services for the county shall be on an official county purchase order as prescribed by the county administrator. The administrator has the authority not to honor purchases made outside these procedures. The individual responsible for the purchase may incur these obligations instead. Purchase orders are specific as to vendor and cannot be reassigned. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-5) 
Sec. 2-252. - Source selection. 
(a)  All purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost over $25,000.00 shall be based on competitive bidding or proposal procedures. These procedures include formal advertising, contracts, specifications, sealed bids, public opening, bid deposits and performance bonds. Equipment purchases from the state department of administrative services surplus or from state contracts are exempt from this provision. The county reserves the right to reject bids, waive technicalities and make awards in the best interest of the county and in compliance with state law. 
(b)  Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services with an estimated cost between $5,000.01 and $24,999.99 shall be based upon written competitive quotations from at least three reputable vendors if available, without regard for formal advertising. Equipment purchases from the state department of administrative services surplus or from state contacts are exempt from this provision. 
(c)  Any purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services estimated to cost between $1,000.00 and $5,000.00 shall be based upon verbal quotations from at least three reputable vendors if available. Equipment purchases from the state department of administrative services surplus or from state contracts are exempt from this provision. All purchases for materials, supplies, equipment or services in excess of $1,000.00 must have a purchase requisition approved by the county administrator or county commissioner in writing. 
(d)  Any purchase for materials, supplies, equipment or services between $250.01 and $1,000.00 must have the approval of the county administrator or a county commissioner. Any item, materials or service that has a value of $250.00 or less may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the using agency or in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing agent. 
(e)  Sole source purchases shall be allowed when only one source is able to fill the requirements for the intended use. Sole source may be used for compatibility with equipment for repair purposes or to continue standardization. The county administrator, commission chairman or vice-chair shall approve all initial sole source purchases. 
(f)  Emergency purchases shall be allowed when there is a threat to the health, safety or welfare of people or property or when faced with the loss of an essential governmental service. Competitive purchasing shall be resumed as soon as practical. The county administrator or a county commissioner must authorize the initiation of this procedure. 
(g)  Professional services refer to such services as legal, medical, engineering, surveying, architectural and others whose professions are licensed by the state. It is the policy of the county to award contracts for professional services on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications at a fair and reasonable price with the selection based on the best interest of the county. The county administrator shall issue a request for qualifications from a minimum of three candidates if available 
(h)  Local preference. Bids awarded to local vendors contribute to the local tax base and will, therefore, be given special consideration when bidding against outside vendors. The county administrator is given the authority to give vendors from within the confines of the county, whose initial bid is within three percent of the low bid submitted by an out-of-county bidder, an opportunity to meet the lower bid price. The local bidder must agree in writing within 48 hours to meet the lowest price. This policy does not apply to any purchases of materials, equipment or services in excess of $20,000.00. On those cases, the board of commissioners will make their decision based on the lowest and best bid by a responsive and responsible bidder submitted. 
(i)  The purchasing agent should use state DOAS contracts where feasible and if in the best interest of the county. The purchasing agent is also allowed to use the Georgia Correctional Industries Administration as a vendor. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-6) 
Sec. 2-253. - Multiyear contracts. 
The county may enter into a multiyear contract or purchase agreement to lease, purchase or lease-purchase any goods, materials, real property, personal property, services, or supplies conditional on the following requirements: 
(1)  The contract must terminate and renew at the end of the calendar year. 
(2)  The contract must specify the total obligation of the county. 
(3)  The title of any supplies, material, equipment or other personal property must remain with the vendor until the obligation is liquidated or it must be specified in the contract that the title reverts back to the provider upon termination of the agreement or contract. 
(4)  The contract or agreement must specify that the county can terminate the contract if funds are not appropriated. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-7) 
Secs. 2-254—2-284. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq.; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-285. - Construction contracts. 
(a)  Construction contacts, excluding roads, over $100,000.00 will be let in accordance with the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A § 36-91-1 et seq. 
(b)  Construction contracts between $2,500.01 and $99,999.99 will be secured by either competitive sealed bids or sealed proposals based upon the delivery method and in the best interest of the county. 
(c)  Construction contracts under $2,500.00 shall be considered as normal repair, maintenance or operating expense. The contact may be bid or offered with written competitive quotations without regard for advertising 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-8) 
Sec. 2-286. - Advertisement of contract opportunities. 
(a)  Contract opportunities shall be posted conspicuously in the county courthouse and advertised twice in the four weeks preceding the bid/proposal opening. The first advertisement must run at least four weeks before the bid opening date. The second advertisement must follow at least two weeks later. 
(b)  Plans and specifications must be available on the first day of the advertisement and must be available to the public. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-8) 
Sec. 2-287. - Bonds and oath. 
(a)  Bid, payment and performance bonds shall be required on all projects over $50,000.00 and may be required on contracts over $20,000.00 at the discretion of the county commissioners. bid bonds or proposal guarantees must be five percent of the bid price. 
(b)  All contractors must execute a written oath stating that they have not unlawfully restricted competitive bidding on the project. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-8) 
Sec. 2-288. - Record keeping and retention. 
(a)  The county administrator shall create and maintain the following files for use in the purchasing and contracting process: 
(1)  Bidders list; 
(2)  Purchase order file; 
(3)  Requisition file by department; and 
(4)  Bid, proposal and quotation file both completed and solicitations 
(b)  All records are subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-70 through 50-18-77 (the "Georgia Open Records Act"), and shall be retained in accordance with the retention schedule established by the Georgia Secretary of State, department of archives and history. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-10) 
State Law reference— Disposal of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102. 
Sec. 2-289. - Disposition of real property. 
Disposition of real property shall be conducted at a public sale in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3 or as otherwise provided for by state law, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A redemption of real property acquired by a tax deed; 
(2)  A grant of easement or license; 
(3)  A grant or conveyance of right-of-way or other transportation purpose; 
(4)  A conveyance to any other unit of government; 
(5)  A conveyance of recreational area to the recreation authority. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to control and dispose of county real property, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-2. 
Sec. 2-290. - Disposition of personal property. 
The board of commissioners shall be the sole determinant of whether a particular item or group of items has no further value to the county. They may deem such personal property as surplus and order it sold by public auction, by sealed bids, by spot bids or by other means most advantageous to the county. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-11) 
Secs. 2-291—2-313. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ROAD CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County road construction contracts and bidding, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-60 et seq. 

Sec. 2-314. - Bidding; exemptions. 
(a)  The county shall award all contracts with private firms to build, rebuild or maintain a road that cost over $20,000.00 to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. The contract must be approved by a resolution of the board of commissioners and entered in the official minutes. 
(b)  Contracts with the state, other counties or cities are exempt from this provision. 
(c)  The county is exempt from the bidding law for purchases of supplies, material and equipment if the county performs the work. 
(d)  Emergency repairs under this section as defined by O.C.G.A § 36-91-2(5) are exempt from the bidding provisions. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-9) 
Sec. 2-315. - Advertisement; right of rejection. 
(a)  All contract opportunities subject to the bidding law referred to in this section must be advertised in the legal organ of the county at least two times with the first ad appearing two weeks before the opening of the bid cycle. The second must appear one week after the first. 
(b)  The county and the board of commissioners reserve the right to reject any and all bids, readvertise the project, perform the work in-house or abandon the project. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-9) 
Sec. 2-316. - Bonds and oath. 
(a)  Bonds are required on all road construction projects. All bidders must submit a proposal guaranty in an amount sufficient to ensure the execution of the contract with a minimum amount of five percent of the bid amount. 
(b)  The contractor must provide the county with a payment bond and a performance bond in the amount of the bid on all road contracts over $5,000.00. The contractor must provide the county with proof of sufficient general liability in the county's name to protect against all claims for personal or property damage. 
(c)  All contractors must execute a written oath stating that they have not unlawfully restricted competitive bidding on the project. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2-9) 
State Law reference— Road construction contractor bonds, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-69. 
Secs. 2-317—2-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CAPITAL BUDGET POLICIES 

Sec. 2-336. - Intent. 
Capital projects will be undertaken to preserve infrastructure and public facilities; promote economic development and enhance the quality of life; improve the delivery of services; preserve community assets; and improve economically depressed areas and those with low and moderate income households. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 2-337. - Capital improvement program. 
(a)  The county will seek to develop and maintain a five year capital improvement program (CIP) annually to direct the financing of and appropriations for all capital projects. The county defines a capital project for inclusion in the CIP as any asset or project in excess of $5,000.00 with an estimated useful life of three or more years. 
(b)  The county will coordinate the development of the capital improvement program with the development of the operating budget to insure that future operating costs are projected and included in the operating budget where appropriate. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-2) 
State Law reference— Authority to develop capital improvement programs, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3. 
Sec. 2-338. - Vehicle replacement. 
The county will develop a program to replace authorized vehicles and equipment without significant impact to the capital budget. This is to include a budgeted capital replacement allocation from the departmental section of the general fund to replace assigned vehicles. This section shall authorize the establishment of a local resource capital project fund for the acquisition of vehicles. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-3) 
Sec. 2-339. - Authorization to seek grant funds. 
The county will seek public and private grants, contracts, and other outside sources of revenue to fund projects included in the capital improvement program. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-4) 
Sec. 2-340. - Budget length. 
Budgets for capital projects shall not lapse at the end of a fiscal year. They shall be adopted in a project length budget and remain in effect until project completion. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-5) 
Sec. 2-341. - Capital asset threshold. 
The threshold for recording capital assets in the General Fixed Asset Account Group (GFAAG) shall be a cost of $5,000.00 and an estimated useful life of three or more years. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3-6) 
Secs. 2-342—2-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - INVESTMENTS 

Sec. 2-371. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the safety and liquidity of investments and to ensure the highest possible return on investments and to maximize the utilization of excess county funds. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-1) 
Sec. 2-372. - Scope. 
This investment policy applies to all funds under the control of the county and accounted for in an annual financial report and includes: 
(1)  General fund; 
(2)  Special revenue fund; 
(3)  Jail fund; 
(4)  Capital project fund; and 
(5)  Other funds as may be created. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-2) 
Sec. 2-373. - Investment criteria. 
The county's investment criteria in order of priority are: 
(1)  Safety. Preservation of principal shall always be the foremost objective in any investment transaction involving county funds. Those individuals investing funds on the county's behalf must first ensure that capital losses are avoided by limiting credit and interest risk. Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the failure of the security issues or backer. Interest risk is the risk that market value portfolios will fall due to an increase in general interest rates. 
(2)  Liquidity. The second objective shall be the maintenance of sufficient liquidity within the investment portfolio. The county's investment portfolio shall be structured such that securities mature at the time when cash is needed to meet anticipated demands (static liquidity). Additionally, since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should maintain some securities with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity). 
(3)  Return on investment. The third objective shall be the realization of competitive investment rates, relative to the risk being assumed. However, yield on the county's investment portfolio is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described in this section. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-3) 
Sec. 2-374. - Delegation of authority. 
The board of commissioners of the county shall establish the overall investment policies for the county. The county administrator is designated as the investment director for the county and authorized to make all appropriate investment decisions within the scope of those policies. The county administrator shall maintain a standard of prudence in accord with the "prudent person rule" that all investment decisions will be made with the judgment and care a person of intelligence and prudence would exercise in the administration of their own affairs. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-4) 
Sec. 2-375. - Acceptable investments. 
All investments of the county shall adhere to O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4 and the county may invest and reinvest any money subject to its control and jurisdiction in: 
(1)  Obligations of this state or of other states; 
(2)  Obligations issued by the federal government; 
(3)  Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the federal government or a federal government agency; 
(4)  Obligations of any corporation of the federal government; 
(5)  Prime bankers' acceptances; 
(6)  The local government investment pool established by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-8; 
(7)  Repurchase agreements; and 
(8)  Obligations of other political subdivisions of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-5) 
Sec. 2-376. - Allocation of interest. 
All interest earned from investments unless otherwise indicated by action of the board of commissioners shall be retained within the fund generating the interest. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-6) 
Sec. 2-377. - Cash and investments. 
The county shall require pledges of collateral for all cash deposits and investments from depository institutions as required by the O.C.G.A. § 36-83-5. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4-7) 
Secs. 2-378—2-397. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - DEBT MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-398. - Purpose of debt issuance. 
The county will utilize longterm debt only for capital improvement projects that are too extensive to be financed from current revenue sources. The county will not use longterm debt to finance current or ongoing operations of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5-1) 
Sec. 2-399. - Debt limitations. 
(a)  The county is authorized by law to issue general obligation bonds not in excess of 10 percent of the assessed values of all taxable property within the county and for a period of time not to exceed 30 years. However, the county will remain cognizant of the millage assessed for repayment of general government debt and will strive to maintain a stable millage in the debt service area for the benefit of its taxpayers. Where feasible, special assessment, revenue and other self-supporting bonds will be utilized instead of general obligation bonds. 
(b)  When issuing general obligation bonds the county must assess and collect annual taxes sufficient to pay the principle and interest of the debt within 30 years. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5-2) 
Sec. 2-400. - Types of debt. 
(a)  The county is permitted to issue any form of debt that does not contradict the existing constitution and laws of the state. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  General obligation bonds; 
(2)  Revenue bonds for the county proprietary funds; 
(3)  Intergovernmental contracts; 
(4)  Lease purchases; 
(5)  Certificates of participation; and 
(6)  Temporary loans. 
(b)  Tax anticipation notes or any other revenue anticipation borrowing will be avoided if possible. In the event such borrowing occurs on an emergency basis, the debt will be retired in full by the end of the calendar year in which it is incurred. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5-3) 
Sec. 2-401. - Debt features. 
(a)  Maturity of debt. When the county utilizes long-term financing, the county shall pay back the debt within a period of time that does not exceed the life of the project financed. The county will seek level or declining debt repayment schedules and will avoid the use of balloon principal payments at the end of the term of the borrowing. 
(b)  Redemption provisions. Where cost effective, the county will incorporate early call or prepayment features into the structured debt. 
(c)  Rates. Due to the higher volatility of variable rate debt, the county will examine each variable rate borrowing closely on a case-by-case basis before issuance. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5-4) 
Sec. 2-402. - Interfund loans. 
Where cost effective, the county may choose to issue loans between funds within its reporting entity. The interest rate applied to such loans will be at the lowest available rate the county could obtain on the market or from governmental pooled resources. The county budget officer will complete a document outlining the amount, rate, repayment terms, and other such pertinent items after direction is issued by the county commission to complete the interfund loan transaction. Careful analysis will be performed on the lending fund's working capital to ensure adequate cash flows will remain after the money is transferred to the borrowing fund. The lending fund will not incur financial hardship or an increase in rate structure as a result of the transaction. If the loan is considered noncurrent, the loan transaction should be listed as an advance and a reserve to fund balance created. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5-5) 
Secs. 2-403—2-432. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - CAPITAL ASSETS 

Sec. 2-433. - Criteria. 
A capital asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is tangible in nature. 
(2)  It has a useful life of greater than three years. 
(3)  It is not a repair part or supply item. 
(4)  It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $5,000.00. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-1) 
Sec. 2-434. - Valuation. 
All assets shall be valued at original or historic cost. If the historic cost is not available the county may use either standard costing of a like unit at the estimated date of acquisition or back trending to arrive at an estimated cost based on the use of current cost factored by the price index since acquisition. Contributed capital assets shall be valued at fair market value. The county is a phase three government under GASBS 34 and will not be required to value or retroactively report existing infrastructure. All new infrastructures, as defined by GASBS 34, will be reported. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-2) 
Sec. 2-435. - Recording. 
All capital assets that meet the capitalization threshold of $5,000.00 shall be recorded and maintained in the general fixed asset account group. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-3) 
Sec. 2-436. - Depreciation method. 
The county shall use the straight-line method of depreciating capitalized assets. The county will depreciate infrastructure and not implement the modified approach for infrastructure. Useful life will be determined following best current practices. Fully depreciated assets that remain in use shall remain in the GFAAG. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-4) 
Sec. 2-437. - General policy. 
(a)  Proper documentation. Each department head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording, acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their department. County property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. 
(b)  Recording of capital assets. Unless otherwise approved by the county administrator, all capital assets must be recorded within 30 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of the asset. An inventory control tag must be applied to all capital assets. An inventory tag shall be applied to all inventory items with an initial cost of over $500.00. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-5) 
Sec. 2-438. - Acquisition. 
(a)  Methods. There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis for valuing the asset. Capital assets may be acquired in the following ways: 
(1)  New purchases; 
(2)  Donations; 
(3)  Transfers from other county departments; 
(4)  County surplus; 
(5)  Internal/external construction; 
(6)  Lease purchases; 
(7)  Trade-in; or 
(8)  Forfeiture or condemnation. 
(b)  Purchased assets. Purchased assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in preparing the asset for use. 
(c)  Donated assets. Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the department head. Fair market value may be defined as, but is not limited to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate vendors. 
(d)  Individual unit prices. The county will recognize acquisition costs based on individual unit prices. Assets should not be grouped. 
(e)  Passing of title. For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is considered to pass when the asset is available for the agency's use and when the agency assumes responsibility for maintaining the asset. 
(f)  Transfer upon operational status. Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account to the related building, improvements other than buildings, or equipment accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example, are assumed to be operational when an authorization to occupy the building is issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been made on all the construction contracts. 
(g)  Lease purchases. Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases or through lease financing arrangements. All lease purchases are subject to annual appropriation and must be renewed annually. Title cannot transfer to the county until obligation is settled. 
(h)  Transfer of capital assets. An asset transfer between departments is recorded under the new department with original acquired date and funding amount. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-5) 
Sec. 2-439. - Disposal of capital assets. 
(a)  Sale of capital assets by the county must be to the highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or by auction. The sale must be publicized in accordance with state laws. 
(b)  When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances reported and from inventory reports; however, the asset record, including disposal information, remains on the master file for three years, in the county administrator's office, after which time it is purged from the system according to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life guidelines. 
(c)  A disposal action is appropriate only when certain conditions occur resulting in an asset no longer being in the possession of the agency. Assets, no longer in use, that remain in the possession of the department, are considered surplus property and not a disposal. 
(d)  Capital assets may be disposed of in any one of six ways: 
(1)  Sale or trade-in; 
(2)  Transfer; 
(3)  Abandonment/retirement. Assets are abandoned or retired when there is no longer any use for them in the department, they are of no safe or appropriate use to any other county department and they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded in; 
(4)  Lost or stolen. Stolen items must be reported to the county sheriff and a report filed. A copy of this report must accompany the disposal record. 
(5)  Casualty loss. Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to the county administrator immediately for follow-up with the county's insurance carrier; and 
(6)  Cannibalization. Cannibalization is the taking of parts and employing them for like uses within the department, such as is often the practice in computer or vehicle maintenance. Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting cannibalization on the disposal record. Departments will send documentation of items cannibalized to the county administrator's office, and all remaining costs and accumulated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the general capital asset fund. 
(e)  All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these six qualifying conditions and after submission of all appropriate documentation to the county administrator's office, will be removed from the master departmental asset file and considered disposed. 
(f)  Department management is responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and implementing procedures to more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems, inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-5) 
Sec. 2-440. - Physical inventory. 
An annual physical inventory of all capital assets will be performed by the county administrator's office. The inventory will be conducted with the least amount of interruption possible to the department's daily operation. A full report of the results of the inventory will be sent, within 30 days of completion, to all departments for verification and acceptance. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6-6) 
Secs. 2-441—2-463. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - GRANTS 

Sec. 2-464. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this policy is to provide direction in the application, acceptance and administration of funds awarded through grants to the county from other local governments, the state or federal government, nonprofit agencies, philanthropic organizations and the private sector. 
(Code 2002, § 1-7-1) 
Sec. 2-465. - Application and acceptance of grants. 
(a)  The county administrator is given authority to make application for and accept grants that: 
(1)  Are expected to be $50,000.00 or less on an annual basis with no required county match; 
(2)  Are expected to be $25,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of 20 percent or less; or, 
(3)  Are expected to be $10,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of over 40 percent. 
(b)  The county commission must approve the application of and acceptance of any grants in excess of the limits established in this article. 
(c)  The county will assess the merits of a particular program as if it were funded with local tax dollars. Local tax dollars will not be used to make up for losses of intergovernmental aid without first reviewing the program and its merits as a budgetary increment. Therefore, no grant will be accepted that will incur management and reporting costs greater than the grant amount. 
(Code 2002, § 1-7-2) 
Sec. 2-466. - Grant administration. 
(a)  Each department, authority or board must notify the county administrator upon acceptance of any grant. Prior to the receipt or expenditure of grant revenues, the county administrator must be provided with the following information prior to receiving grant revenues or making purchases against the grant: 
(1)  Copy of grant application; 
(2)  Notification of grant award; 
(3)  Financial reporting and accounting requirements including separate account codes and/or bank accounts; and 
(4)  Schedule of grant payments. 
(b)  Each board or authority is responsible for the management of its grant funds and periodic reporting. 
(c)  Any departments, commissions or authorities in the county who receive a grant from the county budget will be required to furnish the commissioner' office a financial statement before funds budgeted will be issued. Financial reports are due by February 1 each year. 
(d)  The county shall establish two funds for grant disbursements. They shall be a major grant fund for all single grants in excess of $50,000.00 or two percent of county revenue and a multiple grant fund to accumulate by division all grants under $50,000.00. These funds shall be subject to audit by the independent auditor and all state grant funds must have annual reports completed and submitted to the state department of audits. 
(Res. of 2-9-1993; Code 2002, § 1-7-3) 
Secs. 2-467—2-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ACCOUNTING, AUDITS, AND FINANCIAL REPORTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-486. - Basis of accounting. 
(a)  The county shall use the modified accrual basis of accounting for all governmental fund types at the fund level. The county shall use the accrual method for all proprietary or fiduciary funds at the fund level. 
(b)  At the entity-wide level the county shall aggregate the governmental fund information and report using the accrual basis of accounting. 
(Code 2002, § 1-9-1) 
Sec. 2-487. - Basic principles. 
(a)  A qualified external auditor, in accordance with GA Code § 36-81-7, will perform an independent audit in compliance with generally accepted audit standards annually. This independent audit must be completed and mailed to the state auditor within 180 days of the end of the fiscal year. 
(b)  The county health department and the development authority of the county shall be component units of the county government and reported as such on all government wide financial reports. The county will require audits of their records and the records of any subsequent component units in compliance with state law and generally accepted accounting procedures. 
(c)  The county will endeavor to prepare a comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). 
(d)  The county will maintain accounting practices and an accounting system that are sufficient to enable the preparation and presentation of financial statements that conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The county has adopted and will maintain the Uniform Chart of Accounts for Local Governments in Georgia as approved and amended by the department of community affairs. 
(e)  The county will maintain accurate records of all assets to insure a high degree of stewardship of public property. 
(f)  The county will issue financial statements that conform to governmental generally accepted accounting principles. 
(g)  The county will issue financial reports at the entity level utilizing major funds as defined in GASB 34. The auditors will also include original budget information in the comparison section of the financial reports. 
(h)  The county will report at the government-wide level at a minimum with a statement of net assets and a statement of activities that will disclose the total of primary governmental revenue allocation to the governmental activities. The basis of accounting at the government wide level shall be by the accrual method. To project a true and accurate reflection of the county's financial health the county will insure that all long term assets and liabilities are accounted for in the government-wide financial statements. 
(i)  The county will endeavor to include a management discussion and analysis with the audit. 
(j)  The county will maintain an ongoing system of financial reporting to meet the needs of the board of commissioners, department heads, and the general public. Reporting systems will monitor the cost of providing services where possible. The reporting systems will promote budgetary control and comparative analysis. 
(k)  The county will enter into multiyear agreements when obtaining the services of an independent auditor. Such multiyear agreements will be for periods of at least four years and consistent with applicable legal requirements. Every four years the county will issue a request for proposal to independent auditors to provide an audit for county operations. The current auditing firm will be eligible to propose on this audit. The audit procurement process should be structured so that the principal factor in the selection of an independent auditor is the auditor's ability to perform a quality audit. In no case shall price be the sole criterion for the selection of an auditor. 
(Code 2002, § 1-9-2) 
Secs. 2-488—2-512. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 2-513. - Interment of deceased indigents. 
(a)  Whenever any person dies in the county and the decedent, his family and his immediate kindred are indigent and unable to provide for his decent interment as sworn in an affidavit to the judge of the probate court, the county shall make available from county funds the sum of $500.00 to provide for the proper interment of the decedent. This amount will be the total amount available to pay for the funeral contract. Any money paid by the family will be deducted from the county provided portion. The funeral home shall have the discretion to provide the appropriate level of service. 
(b)  The judge of the probate court shall provide to the governing authority the affidavit with a sworn signature. The form should list the name of the deceased, the date of death, the county where the death occurred and the funeral home providing interment services. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2006, §§ 1-2-2, 1-2-3) 
Chapter 6 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-1. - Prohibited entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a)  Within the unincorporated area of the county, the following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are prohibited upon any premises open to the public or licensed to sell, serve, or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of any food or beverage including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages while such person in unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(c)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b) of this section or where such person performs acts of or acts that simulate any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act that is prohibited by law; 
(2)  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or 
(3)  The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(d)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (b) or (c) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-12-1999, § 1.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1993, § 3; Ord. of 7-12-1999, § 1.1) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Beer means malt beverage as defined herein. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this Code section. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. 3-1-2. 
Secs. 10-2—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER AND WINE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-19. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  All establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the county must close by 2:00 a.m. Tuesday through Friday. 
(b)  No beer or wine shall be sold after midnight on Saturday nights. No open containers are to be allowed on the business premises past 12:30 a.m. Sunday morning, and the premises must be vacated by 1:00 a.m. Sunday morning for the duration of the day. 
(c)  Any public or private premises leased or loaned to an individual, group of individuals, or organization for the purpose of a private or public gathering and upon which premises alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be subject to the same time constraints as the retail dealers of beer and wine. 
(d)  Violation of this provision is prima facie evidence that a nuisance exists, and the sheriff of the county shall use any means necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960; Res. of 2-9-1993) 
Sec. 10-20. - Compliance with state law, regulations; restrictions on delivery. 
(a)  No beer or wine shall be sold in the county during any year by any retailer or wholesaler unless the licensee is and remains in compliance with all state laws and rules. 
(b)  No wholesaler shall sell or deliver any beer or wine to any retailer who is not complying with these regulations. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960) 
Sec. 10-21. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No business licensed hereunder shall be operated within 100 yards of any church or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus, and no distilled spirits, beer, or wine shall be sold or delivered, or offered for sale or delivery, within such limits. 
(b)  No distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages shall be sold or delivered, or offered for sale or delivery within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center located in the unincorporated area of the county and owned or operated by the state, the county, or any municipal government. 
(c)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(d)  Beer and wine shall be sold exclusively in a building or storehouse which is separate and distinct from any residence or living quarters; and no place of business shall hereafter be licensed which is not separate and distinct from a residence of living quarters. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 10-22. - Posting of regulations. 
Every retail dealer shall keep posted in his place of business, in a conspicuous place, a copy of these regulations. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960) 
Sec. 10-23. - Bond; forfeiture. 
(a)  No wholesale or retail dealer shall be granted a license to sell beer and/or wine until such dealer shall have posted with the administrator of the county board of commissioners, in addition to the license fee, a cash bond, to be conditioned for the faithful compliance with these regulations, in an amount established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Upon violation of any law, or any of these regulations, or the revocation of the dealer's license for such cause, said bond shall be automatically forfeited to the county. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960) 
Sec. 10-24. - Taxes. 
(a)  No beer shall be sold in the county by any wholesaler or retailer unless and until a tax of $0.05 for each can or bottle containing 12 ounces, or proportionately thereof, so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans, kegs and barrels or various sizes, has been paid. 
(b)  No wine shall be sold in the county by any wholesaler or retailer unless and until a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter has been paid. 
(c)  Every wholesaler is charged with the duty of paying the excise taxes on beer and wine provided for in this section. The taxes shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the county by the wholesale dealer. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960; Res. of 2-19-1973; Amd. of 11-11-2002) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise taxes on malt beverages to be paid by wholesale dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81; prohibition on requirement for markings on beverage containers regarding excise taxes, O.C.G.A. § 35-5-82; local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Secs. 10-25—10-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-41. - Privilege; revocation. 
The sale or beer and wine is a mere privilege and not a right, and the board of commissioners of the county, reserves the right to revoke the license of any wholesale or retail dealer at any time, with or without cause, with or without notice, notwithstanding any provision in the foregoing regulations. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 10-42. - Required. 
(a)  Every wholesale and retail dealer in beer or wine doing any business in the county shall obtain a license to carry on such business in said county and shall pay the annual license fee on or before January 1 of each year in advance. The amount of the license fee shall be as determined from time to time by the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  No beer or wine shall be sold in any club, public or private, except under these regulations, which shall apply to all clubs and the same as to private businesses. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960; Res. of 11-11-1988) 
State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40; county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41; restriction on county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43; dealing in wine at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; 
Sec. 10-43. - Application. 
(a)  Any new applicant requesting a license for beer and wine shall submit a request to the office of the county board of commissioners in writing. Such request will be placed on the agenda of the next commissioner's regular meeting session, at which the commissioners will determine, by majority vote, whether applicant may proceed with the application process. 
(b)  If by majority vote the commissioners allow the applicant to proceed further with the application process, a notice will be placed in the legal organ showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license applied for and the time and place that the commission will act on the application. 
(c)  All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the county sheriff or a designee thereof as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by the commissioner's office. If the sheriff determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any sheriff's department investigation, the commissioner's office shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
(Res. of 11-11-1988, §§ 2, 3, 5) 
Sec. 10-44. - Qualifications. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this article shall be bona fide residents of the county or shall designate a bona fide resident of the county who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. Applicants may be owners or managers of the business. Corporations may apply for the license to be issued in their corporate names. 
(b)  No license shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall, in any state or federal court, have been convicted: 
(1)  Within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony involving moral turpitude or otherwise reasonably relating to the conduct of the business for which the license is issued; or 
(2)  Within two years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any two or more misdemeanors, other than traffic offenses, involving moral turpitude or otherwise reasonably relating to the conduct of the business for which the license is issued. 
(c)  The term "conviction," as used in this section, shall include an adjudication of guilty or a plea of guilt or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
(Res. of 11-11-1988, §§ 4, 6) 
State Law reference— Discretion and due process regarding grant or suspension of local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 
Sec. 10-45. - Fees. 
All approved applications for new beer and wine licenses shall be accompanied by payment in cash or by certified check for all applicable license fees and taxes. A schedule of license fees is on file in the county commissioner's office and will be made available to all applicants upon request. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960; Res. of 11-11-1988, § 1) 
Sec. 10-46. - Revocation. 
(a)  Upon sufficient evidence produced to satisfy the board that any wholesaler or retailer has violated any of the provisions of these regulations, the license of any wholesaler or retailer shall be immediately revoked; and the bond of the wholesaler or retailer shall be forfeited, either with or without notice to the holder of such license. 
(b)  Any license issued under this article or past articles may be suspended for a definite time or may be revoked if the licensee or any employee of licensee has been convicted of the violation of any act prohibited by this article, of failure to perform any act required by this article, or is convicted of the violation of any other ordinance of the county or any state or federal law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. The forfeiture of bond or collateral or a plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(Res. of 3-4-1960; Res. of 11-11-1988, § 7) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abandonment or "dumping" of animals at county waste disposal facilities prohibited, § 54-37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The county board of commissioners finds, determines, and declares that this chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the county and the inhabitants thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any description of vertebrate, excluding homo sapiens. 
Animal control authority means designated employees or officers of the county. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
At large means any animal is at large when it is off the premises of the owner of the animal and is not under the control of a responsible person. 
Auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as herein defined. 
Cruelty means every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animals as defined in this section. 
Fowl means any warmblooded, feathered, flying or nonflying animals. 
Humane manner means care of an animal, to include but not to be limited to safety, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means any premises wherein any person engaged in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
Livestock means any animal that has hooves. 
Neutered means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Nuisance an animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property, other than the property of the owner of the animal, or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
(4)  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
(5)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
Pet means any animal kept for pleasure, excluding livestock. 
Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Responsible person means any accountable human being. 
Restraint means "under control" as defined in this section. 
Spayed means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Under control means any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined by fence, pen, cage, electronic device, chain, leash or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner, of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of its owner, or is restrained by leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
Veterinary clinic or veterinary hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Bites or attempts to bite indiscriminately; 
(2)  Has been involved in more than one biting incident; or 
(3)  Is, in the opinion of an agent of the sheriff of the county or other designated authority, a potential danger to persons or property. 
The term "vicious animal" shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental operation, nor a trained guard dog in performance of its duties while confined to the property of the owner or other responsible person. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties; continuing violation; jurisdiction. 
Any violation of this chapter is punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. All offenses shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-4. - Prohibited treatment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by commission or omission, to do any of the following: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal. 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with proper food consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to shelter adequate to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily. 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times. 
(5)  Abandon any animal. 
(6)  Intentionally poison any animal. 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in such person's possession or under such person's control. 
(8)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions. 
(9)  Keep, confine or transport an animal in other than a humane manner. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Abandoning dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-3; performing cruel acts on dogs; O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; prohibited acts regarding equines, O.C.G.A. § 4-13-3; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Secs. 14-5—14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VACCINATION 

Sec. 14-27. - Generally. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the county unless such dog or cat is vaccinated as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-28. - Rabies. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over four months of age within the county shall be vaccinated against rabies once each year by a licensed veterinarian, who will issue to the owner a durable metal tag and a certificate of vaccination approved by the state department of human resources. Tags must be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and be worn at all times except by show dogs at show time. Tags are not transferable from one dog or cat to another dog or cat. 
(b)  The county commission may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Power and duty of local government for control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-29. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Secs. 14-30—14-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRAINT 

Sec. 14-47. - Maintenance of premises. 
An owner of an animal shall maintain such owner's premises in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors that could disturb any person residing nearby said premises. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-48. - Animal or fowl enclosures. 
Any pastures or enclosures shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition, consistent with the needs of the animal involved. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-49. - Confinement generally. 
(a)  An owner of a dog or cat, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, residing within any city limit boundaries, if cities choose to adopt the ordinance and contract with the county to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or in any platted subdivision in which the average lot size is two acres or less shall confine such dog or cat within an adequate fence or enclosure or electronic device or within a house, garage or other building, or some other method to prevent the dog or cat from running at large. It shall further be the duty of any owner or keeper of any dog or cat, regardless of the size of the owner's lot or property, to keep such dog or cat under control as to: 
(1)  Prevent such dog or cat from becoming a danger to persons or property at any location, or trespassing upon another person's property without that person's permission; and 
(2)  Prevent such dog or cat from running at large upon the streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places. 
(b)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary clinic or hospital or in a kennel or under control in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with a male dog or cat, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to allow a dog or any other animal to enter any commercial establishment where food for human consumption is located or sold unless such dog or any other animal is trained to assist physically handicapped individuals. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other type of animal, livestock or other fowl within the county to permit them to run at large or be a menace or nuisance to such person's neighbors or the public in general. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Confinement of dogs in heat, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4. 
Sec. 14-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after October 1, 2006; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top; and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height; and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape whether from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of local government in control of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20. 
Sec. 14-51. - Rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the state department of human resources and the animal control authority all cases of rabies in animals treated by such veterinarian, giving the name and address of the owner. Every veterinarian shall also report the names and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by such rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report such information, to the extent known, to the state department of human resources and the animal control authority. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound or have the animal incarcerated or impounded in the facility of some competent veterinarian within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for such period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. All costs of this incarceration shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-52. - Owner responsibility. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be kept under restraint. 
(b)  Every dangerous dog or cat, as determined by the sheriff of the county or other designated authority shall be confined by its owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(c)  No dog or cat shall be allowed to cause a nuisance. The owner of every dog or cat shall be held responsible for every behavior of such dog or cat under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Dog and cat owners shall ensure that their dog or cat carries identification at all times in the form of microchip, tag, or other means to allow easy determination of the owners. 
(e)  Livestock guarding dogs shall be exempt from nuisance regulations when performing duties protecting livestock on premises owned or controlled by the owner. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Secs. 14-53—14-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-78. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control authority and by the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-79. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, obstruct, hinder or molest the animal control authority or any other officer in the performance of their duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control authority, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Interfering with animal control officer, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-6. 
Sec. 14-80. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officers, sheriff's deputies and other enforcement officers of the county are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, an animal that has bitten a person within ten days. 
(b)  The animal control authority may take all necessary steps to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the animal is subject to danger of injury due to temperature. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control authority or its officers for this action. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Sec. 14-81. - Summons. 
Representatives of the animal control authority and officers of the county sheriff's department are hereby authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The summons shall be in a form approved by the county magistrate court, shall designate the offense charged, and shall require the person so charged to appear before the county magistrate court on a date certain to answer the charges therein contained. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2006) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 18-19. - Business license tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bank means any financial institution chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. 
Savings and loan association means any financial institution, other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 18-21. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 2) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide minimum annual amount of tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 18-22. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners of the county on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The board of commissioners of the county shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this resolution based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 18-23. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this resolution shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by this article unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 18-24. - Administrative provisions 
The county administrator is hereby directed to forward a copy of this resolution to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Res. of 12-31-1983, § 5) 
Secs. 18-25—18-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USED MOTOR VEHICLE YARD 

Sec. 18-52. - Annual license fee. 
There is imposed an annual licensing fee on each used motor vehicle yard operating with the unincorporated areas of the county, in an amount established by the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Authority for local regulatory fees on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; limitations on local regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
(Res. of 6-8-1993) 
Secs. 18-53—18-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TIMBER HARVESTING 

Sec. 18-78. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the proper notification to authorities of all timber harvesting in unincorporated the county, to provide for the protection and maintenance of the county owned roads and rights-of-way, and to provide for the requirement of a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to protect the county against any loss or damages to county property resulting from said timber harvesting. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(1); Ord. of 12-13-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of local government to require notice and bonds or letters of credit regarding timber harvesting operations, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 et seq. 
Sec. 18-79. - Violations and penalties. 
Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county and upon conviction the violator shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation. All other violations of this article shall subject the violator to penalties as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day of operation without sufficient and legal notice or without a surety bond or letter of credit shall constitute a new and separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(1); Ord. of 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 18-80. - Notification requirements and bonds. 
(a)  All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, post or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located in the county or inside or outside of the state must provide notice of such harvesting to the county commissioners or the designated agent thereof prior to cutting any such timber. Prior written notice is required of any person or firm for each separate tract harvested. Any tract or parcel of timber of sufficient size to require a separate pair of ingress and egress points over a county-owned right-of-way shall require a separate notice. 
(b)  The written notice shall be upon a form designed and provided by the governing authority of the county and shall consist of: 
(1)  A map of the area that identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks that will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting said timber. 
(c)  All points of ingress and egress are subject to the approval of the county road department. 
(d)  Each notice of intent to harvest shall not be or remain in effect for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the office of the county commissioners a surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00 executed by a surety company licensed to do business within the state or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid and irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(e)  The bond shall protect the county against any damage caused by such person or firm, tendering the surety bond or letter of credit, or any agent, employee or contractor or said person or firm and will be used to reimburse the county for any cost incurred to repair the county right-of-way, to reditch or repair existing ditch structure or for the removal of any harvesting residue to include but not limited to tree tops, debris, logs, pulpwood and other materials placed in or around said rights-of-way. The bond shall also be used to offset any cost to maintain or repair county roads damaged by ingress or egress of trucks engaged in said harvesting operation. 
(f)  The county road supervisor shall be responsible for the determination of damages or losses. The company responsible for operations under the timber notification will be given notice of the damage and allowed 72 hours to restore the road to a safe and operable condition as determined by the road supervisor and the road commissioner. 
(g)  All repairs, material used and final releasing condition shall be approved and accepted by the road supervisor and road commissioner. The timber operator shall be responsible for any cost associated with signing, closing or the use of safety equipment required during that 72 hour period. 
(h)  If a surety bond or letter of credit is held, claimed against or forfeited for any amount to reimburse the county for such damages then any notice that is dependent on said bond shall not be, or remain, in effect for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm shall cause to be delivered to the county a separate surety bond or letter of credit in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(i)  For purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(j)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of the county upon receipt of the same by the governing authority of the county or its designated agent and upon compliance with the requirements of this section and at a time when posted with a laminated copy of said notice signed by the code enforcement officer of the county and posted at the harvesting site and until said time that the harvester gives notice as to the completion of said harvest to the governing authority of the county. Any material change in information provided on said notice must be submitted to the governing authority within three business days. 
(k)  The surety bond or letter of credit shall be released by the governing authority of the county upon notification of completion by the person or firm harvesting said tract and only upon final inspection of the harvesting site, points of ingress and egress, all affected rights-of-way and county roads leading to and from the harvesting site by the county code enforcement officer and if necessary by the superintendent of the road department of the county. The surety bond or letter of credit may be retained against future or continuing operations by the company in the county. 
(l)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as a requirement of any persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, post or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located in the county or inside or outside of the state to obtain a permit before commencing said harvesting operation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(1); Ord. of 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 18-81. - Driveways. 
(a)  Pursuant to the right of the county to protect all county owned rights-of-way, ditches, drainage pipes, county roads, and county streets under its jurisdiction, if any logging operation or timber harvesting site needs to cross ditches or shoulders of roads to have ingress or egress to the harvesting site and where in the judgment of the supervisor of the county road department a temporary driveway is required to protect county owned rights-of-way, ditches, drainage pipes, county roads, or county streets under its jurisdiction, such driveway must be installed before harvesting operations can commence. 
(b)  The harvester can at his option install such a temporary driveway with a drainage pipe of appropriate specifications or request the county to install said driveway at the expense of the harvester. 
(c)  The minimum width of any driveway installed, in furtherance of this section, shall be 40 feet. This section shall be construed to convey on the county the power and duty to restrict the access of timber or other commercial vehicles to county rights-of-way at such times when access by those vehicles may cause damage to the county road system. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(1); Ord. of 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 18-82. - Enforcement and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the code enforcement officer of the county or their designee. All violations will be under the jurisdiction of the magistrate court of the county. 
(b)  The county reserves the right to pursue any civil remedies for damages in excess of said surety bond or letter of credit or to institute an action for injunction or mandamus to prevent any unlawful act or to correct or abate a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(1); Ord. of 12-13-2005) 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Res. of 6-11-1990, § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 22-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall be, upon conviction, punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-8) 
Secs. 22-3—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AGENCY 

Sec. 22-21. - Creation; membership; office. 
An emergency management agency is created in and for the county. The office of the emergency management agency shall be the city fire department building. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority for establishment of local emergency management organization, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 22-22. - Director—Nomination. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of the municipalities, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Authority for nomination of local director of emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 22-23. - Same—Powers and duties. 
When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the duties to: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county and cities in the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county plans for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners and the cities in the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration for the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-3) 
Sec. 22-24. - Agency organization. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments, and the emergency functions are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to the appropriate local official for approval. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-5) 
Sec. 22-25. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the board of commissioners or the county administrator, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities, or in their absences their legally appointed successors to be named, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-6) 
State Law reference— Powers of local governing bodies during state of emergency or disaster, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 22-26. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities in the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 22-27—22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 22-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal of any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, means those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area by the disaster or emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, §§ 9-2-1-1, 9-2-3-1) 
Sec. 22-57. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall be, upon conviction, punishable as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 22-58. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency, or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-1-2) 
Sec. 22-59. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this county, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of this county. 
(3)  To wear, carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-1-3) 
State Law reference— Authority for local rules and regulations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 22-60. - Meetings of board of county commissioners. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. The presiding officer or any two members of the board of commissioners without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law may call such meetings. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-2-1) 
State Law reference— Operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 22-61. - Purchasing and public works contracts. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; however, any public works contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-2-2) 
Sec. 22-62. - Code enforcement. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the county Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-2-3) 
Sec. 22-63. - Temporary dwellings. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-2-4) 
Sec. 22-64. - Curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and the property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-3-2) 
Sec. 22-65. - Prohibition of appearance in public places. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew including, not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-3-3) 
Sec. 22-66. - County operations. 
To promote civil stability and to provide basic services to the county in the case of emergencies or hazardous inclement weather it is essential that the county be able to maintain an adequate workforce. The provisions of sections 22-67 and 22-68 shall guide the conduct of county employees in the event of an emergency or a hazardous inclement weather situation. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 22-67. - Essential employees. 
All essential employees engaged in the protection of citizens and emergency services shall be required to report to work at their regular shift unless called in early by their immediate supervisor, the county administrator or the emergency management director. Essential officers and employees are defined as the county administrator, constitutional officers, EMA director, sheriff, deputies and dispatchers, emergency medical service providers, road department employees and code enforcement personnel. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-4-1) 
Sec. 22-68. - Nonessential employees. 
(a)  The chairman of the county commission or the county administrator, in consultation with the EMA director, the road superintendent and the sheriff, shall decide whether to open the courthouse and other county work facilities. It shall be his responsibility to notify the constitutional officers if the courthouse is to be closed. If the courthouse is open, all employees in all offices are expected to report for their assigned shift. If the courthouse is not opened for business at the regular opening hour of 8:30 a.m., all employees are required to check in with the courthouse periodically for updates. Employees will not be paid for regular hours that the courthouse is not in operation. 
(b)  Any employee not able to report for their assigned shift may take annual leave for those hours. If an employee reports for work and is then sent home by the closing of the courthouse the employee will be paid for the remainder of the day. The chairman of the county commission or the county administrator shall make the decision to close the courthouse. All decisions regarding the pay of employee fall under the fiscal responsibility and control of the county commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-4-2) 
Secs. 22-69—22-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY AND DISASTER MUTUAL AID 

Sec. 22-95. - Creation. 
The county commission, and the Participating Georgia Emergency Management Agency (GEMA) Area Three Counties, (GEMA Administrative Area Map) have, by agreement, adopted this Emergency and Disaster Mutual Aid Agreement. 
Editor's note— The GEMA Administrative Area Map is not included herein but is on file at the office of the county administrator. 
State Law reference— Authority for local mutual aid arrangements for emergencies and disasters, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-29. 
Sec. 22-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means the Emergency and Disaster Mutual Aid Agreement. 
Assisting county means the participating county furnishing equipment, services, personnel, or other aid pursuant to this article. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes damage or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor, or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any occurrence, or threat thereof, whether natural, or caused by man, in war or in peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property. 
Emergency management director means the person appointed by the county governing authority to implement the emergency plan of the county. 
Employees means paid, volunteer, and auxiliary employees and emergency management workers. 
Participating county means a county that has duly enacted this article. 
Receiving county means the participating county requesting equipment, services, personnel, or other aid pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 1) 
Sec. 22-97. - Sunset provision. 
This agreement shall be automatically renewed each year; provided, however, that at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the county governing authority, said authority may vote to modify or terminate this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 2) 
Sec. 22-98. - Basic agreement; limitations. 
(a)  Any participating county requested to render mutual aid or exercises and training for mutual aid pursuant to this article shall take such action as is necessary to provide and make available the resources covered by this article in accordance with the terms hereof; provided; however that the assisting county may withhold or withdraw those resources necessary to provide protection for such county. A request for aid may be denied if to send emergency personnel beyond its boundaries would leave a jurisdiction without sufficient personnel available within its limits for service at any incident that might subsequently arise therein. 
(b)  Any participating county agrees that under extraordinary circumstances, it may provide assistance beyond the jurisdiction of the named parties to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 3) 
Sec. 22-99. - Procedure. 
(a)  In the event of any emergency or disaster as defined above in this article, the emergency management director of any participating county or the designee of the county governing authority may request assistance of another participating county by contacting the emergency management director or the designee of the governing authority of that county. 
(b)  The provision of this article shall only apply to requests for assistance made by and to official emergency management directors or the designees of the county governing authority. Requests may be verbal or in writing. If verbal, the request shall be confirmed in writing within ten days of the verbal request. At the time a request is made for aid under this article, written notification of such request shall be forwarded to the state emergency management agency. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 22-100. - Rights and duties; control. 
(a)  Whenever the employees of any political subdivision are rendering aid to another city or county, the employees shall have the same powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities as if they were performing their duties in the political subdivisions in which they are normally employed. 
(b)  Further, each receiving county shall afford to the employees of any other city or county, while operating within its jurisdiction under the terms and conditions of this article, the same powers (except that of arrest, unless specifically authorized by the receiving county), duties, rights, privileges, and immunities as are afforded employees of the receiving county in which they are performing emergency services. 
(c)  Employees of the assisting county will continue under the command and control of their regular leaders, but the organizational units will come under the operational control of the emergency services authorities of the receiving county unless the receiving county relinquishes such control. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 5) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Sec. 22-101. - Licenses and permits. 
Whenever any person holds a license, certificate, or other permit issued by the state or at the local level evidencing the meeting of qualifications for professional, mechanical, or other skills, such person may be permitted by the receiving county to render aid involving such skill in any other participating county to meet an emergency or disaster situation. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 6) 
Sec. 22-102. - Compensation. 
Each participating county shall provide for the payment of compensation and death benefits to injured employees of that county and the representatives of deceased employees in case such employees sustain injuries or are killed while rendering aid pursuant to this article, in the same manner and on the same terms as if the injury or death were sustained within their own county. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 7) 
Sec. 22-103. - Payment and reimbursement; liability. 
Unless otherwise agreed, the receiving county shall pay and reimburse the assisting county for the compensation paid to its employees during the time and rendition of the aid and shall defray the actual traveling and maintenance expenses of the employees while they are rendering the aid. The reimbursement shall include any amounts paid or due for compensation due to personal injury or death while the employees were engaged in rendering the aid. The receiving county shall also be liable for any loss or damage to equipment used in the receiving county pursuant to this article and shall pay any expense incurred in the operation or maintenance thereof. No claim for the loss of, damage to or expense of such equipment shall be allowed unless, within 60 days after the same is sustained or incurred, an itemized notice of the claim under oath is served by mail or otherwise upon the chief fiscal officer of the receiving count. Failure to notify GEMA of a request for aid, as reset out in section 22-99 of this article, may result in a delay of processing reimbursement. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 8) 
Sec. 22-104. - Termination of agreement. 
All parties have retained the right to withdraw from this mutual aid agreement by giving 30 days notice in writing to the other party. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 10) 
Secs. 22-105—22-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SERVICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 22-124. - Purpose and intent. 
The county board of commissioners endorses the concept of a countywide 911 emergency telephone service and is committed to the eventual implementation of such a program on the earliest date feasible for completion of such service. 
(Res. of 12-14-1998) 
Sec. 22-125. - Advisory board. 
The county board of commissioners has created a 911 advisory board to assist the board in: 
(1)  Reviewing and analyzing the progress by public safety agencies in developing 911 system requirements; 
(2)  Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation, and development of a 911 system; 
(3)  Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to affect the 911 system; 
(4)  Assisting in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulation, operating procedures, schedules, and other such policy and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; and 
(5)  Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 22-126. - Members of advisory board. 
The advisory board shall consist of the sheriff of the county, the chief of police of the city, the EMA director, the EMS director, the county fire chief, mayor of the city, county administrator and other individuals knowledgeable of emergency 911 systems and the emergency needs of the citizens of the county. 
(Res. of 12-14-1998) 
Sec. 22-127. - Imposing a 911 charge on prepaid wireless service. 
(a)  911 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 911 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection of 911 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 911 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this section and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this section. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(1), §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2011(1), added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 22-127. 
Secs. 22-128—22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 

Sec. 22-151. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all emergency medical services personnel: 
(1)  All personnel will report to work neat, clean and in full uniform at 0700 hours. The person on-call is expected to be available to respond at 0700 hours to replace the previous employee on-call. 
(2)  No person will leave a shift until he/she is relieved by a member of an oncoming crew. 
(3)  Each duty crew will perform a daily check of the ALS units, BLS units, fire truck and rescue vehicle. 
(4)  An EMS unit will not run with a known defect until the director or his/her designee is notified. 
(5)  All equipment and supplies will be replaced/cleaned on the immediate completion of every run. 
(6)  All duties will be completed as early as possible in the day. 
(7)  Each crew will check the bulletin board, notebook and shift logs for duties, notices and memos each day. 
(8)  Each employee will be responsible for maintaining all certification as required for employment. 
(9)  No employee shall discuss any business or ambulance call with anyone outside of the service. All requests shall be referred to the director. 
(10)  Persons requesting leave will obtain the services of a parttime person at their same level of training and shall have that person sign a form acknowledging their willingness to cover the shift. No employee will take time off without the approval of the director. 
(11)  Any employee approached by an attorney or news media concerning any call will notify the director immediately. 
(12)  Only employees, police, deputies and first responders will be allowed to drive an ambulance. 
(13)  All persons riding in any EMS vehicle will wear seat belts at all times. The only exception will be the paramedic/EMT providing patient care in route to the hospital. 
(14)  Only employees, police, deputies and first responders needed to care for a patient will be allowed to ride in the rear of an ambulance. The only exception will be in the care of a child. 
(15)  One family member may be allowed to ride in the front of an ambulance. 
(16)  No AM/FM cassette radio will be played at a level that can be heard outside the ambulance. 
(17)  The duty crew will stay in continual contact with dispatch any time they are not at the station. 
(18)  Ambulance personnel will not engage in any activity that could be interpreted or constructed to be or leading to sexual activity of any shape, form or fashion. This includes any immoral, unethical, unprofessional or socially unacceptable activity while on duty. Engagement in any of the aforementioned activity will result in immediate termination of all persons involved. 
(19)  Persons not employed by the county EMS will not be allowed in the crew quarters after 2200 hours, except with the crew's approval. 
(20)  No purchases will be made by anyone without approval of the director. 
(21)  There will be no smoking in the crew's quarters or in an ambulance transporting a patient. 
(22)  Employees will not be involved in anything that may bring disgrace or bad publicity to the county EMS while on or off duty. 
(23)  Tardiness or habitual absenteeism in reporting to work will not be tolerated. 
(24)  No person is to operate any county EMS vehicle in violation of any state or local law. No unit shall exceed the speed limit by more than ten miles per hour unless the lights and sirens are in operation. 
(25)  All county EMS vehicles will come to a complete stop at all red lights and proceed only when it is safe to do so. 
(26)  At no time will a vehicle run 10-18 except in an emergency situation. 
(27)  All ambulances will be cleaned inside and out before leaving the shift. Units will be washed each shift, if used. 
(28)  Crew quarters will be cleaned, vacuumed, swept and trash taken out at the end of each shift. Kitchen will be cleaned and dishes put away. 
(29)  All employees will maintain a telephone during employment. 
(30)  All employees will maintain a current class C driver's license and will notify the director of any suspension, revocation or expiration immediately. 
(31)  An employee will notify the director upon being charged with any offense by state or local officials. 
(32)  No employee will have any form of drugs or alcohol on EMS premises without a prescription for same and it will be in the original container with name of drug and dosage shown. 
(33)  Calls to dispatch times will be no longer than three minutes day or night. 
(34)  Each employee on a call is responsible for the completed DHR, bill, signatures and copies of insurance cards, hospital information and transported information. 
(35)  No weapons of any kind shall be allowed in crew's quarters or other property of the county EMS. 
(36)  The director will be notified immediately when a vehicle of the county EMS is involved in an accident. 
(37)  No employee will work overtime without the approval of the director. 
(38)  Ambulances will be plugged into shorelines and heaters connected at any time the temperature is below 50 degrees. 
(39)  Persons will not charge phone calls to the county. Any call made and not authorized will be paid by the person making the calls. 
(40)  Persons who willfully destroy, deface or sabotage any county equipment will be required to reimburse the county for replacement. Persons may be suspended or terminated. 
(41)  Persons stealing from the county will be required to reimburse the county for same. Persons will be suspended or terminated. 
(42)  Employees will attend all in service and staff meetings as required by the director. 
(43)  No person will falsify any report required by the county EMS or DHR for any reason. 
(44)  No person employed by the county EMS will accept any gratuity for any service rendered. 
(45)  Employees of the county EMS will not mistreat, abuse, neglect, abandon or withhold treatment from any patient. 
Sec. 22-152. - Dress code. 
(a)  All employees will report to work in the following uniform: 
(1)  Gray, short-sleeve uniform shirt; 
(2)  Black or dark trousers; 
(3)  Black belt; 
(4)  Black shoes; 
(5)  Navy or black flight jacket; 
(6)  Blue EMS or solid color tee-shirt; and 
(7)  Silver EMT, CT or EMT-P collar brass worn at an angle across the point of the collar. The director will wear gold brass. 
Uniforms will be clean, pressed and free from soil and tears. Any missing or malfunctioning fasteners will be replaced. 
(b)  The on-call person may wear a jumpsuit while responding on a call. The jumpsuit will be navy or black. 
(c)  Hair will be neatly trimmed at all times. 
(d)  Excessive jewelry will not be worn. A simple chain may be worn, but not outside the shirt. One wedding set on one hand and a class ring, or other professional ring may be worn on the other hand. A watch may be worn on the arm. Stud-type earrings may be worn. 
(e)  Certification pins may be worn in the pocket flaps of the shirt. 
(f)  Radical clothing and hairstyles will not be worn. 
(g)  Appropriate uniform shirts: 
(1)  Dress grey uniform shirts will be worn October 1 through March 31. 
(2)  Golf shirts will be worn from April 1 through September 30. 
(3)  Jumpsuits may be worn after 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and all shifts on Saturday and Sunday. 
Sec. 22-153. - School tuition policy. 
The county will pay an amount determined, from time to time, by the board of commissions toward paramedic school for employees at the county emergency medical services (EMS). These students will sign a contract agreeing to work for the county EMS while in school and for one year after they become a paramedic or they will have to pay the cost of school back to the county. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999) 
Secs. 22-154—22-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENHANCED 911 ADDRESSING ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2011(2), added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 22-171—22-178. 

Sec. 22-171. - Enactment and short title. 
The Board of County Commissioners of Johnson County, Georgia, hereby enacts and adopts the following article, which shall be known and cited as the "Johnson County Enhanced 911 Addressing Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-172. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Board of commissioners means the Board of County Commissioners of Johnson County. 
County means Johnson County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 2) 
Sec. 22-173. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to improve the Johnson County E-911/Emergency Communication System and to provide for a uniform county-wide address system with respect to street or house numbers assigned to all residences and principal buildings and businesses within the county. This will assist fire and rescue companies/agencies, law enforcement agencies, the United States Postal Service, parcel delivery companies, utility companies, tax appraisal, public works, planning and the general public in the timely and efficient provision of services to residents and businesses in Johnson County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 3) 
Sec. 22-174. - Display required. 
Every location furnished with a 911 address outside of any incorporated area must display that address so that it is visible from the public roadway. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes, including duplex dwelling structures, shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number, or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Such lot, pad, or apartment numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 4) 
Sec. 22-175. - Method of display. 
Assigned 911 address numbers may be fixed to the house, apartment, business, or other location provided that such house, apartment, business, or other location is not more than 40 feet from the center line of the roadway or the road or street in front of such location, and the number must be readily visible from the street or road by persons traveling along the street or road in each direction. 911 address numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the location, as long as the mailboxes or signs are on the same side of the road as the house, apartment, business, or other building or location. If the addresses or numbers are displayed on signs, such signs must be of a durable type and must be located not more than ten feet from the center line of the street or road in front of the property. The numbers on such signs shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. If on mailboxes, the address must be located within ten feet of the access from the public road and shall be displayed on both sides of the mailbox. 
If the house, business, apartment, or other building or location to be numbered is more than 40 feet from the centerline of the street or roadway in front of the property, or for any reason a street address number affixed to the location would not be readily visible from the street or roadway by persons traveling along the street or roadway in each direction, then the 911 address numbers shall be displayed on a sign or mailbox in the premises next to the public roadway in front of the structure, and complying with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 5) 
Sec. 22-176. - Size and condition of addresses. 
Assigned 911 addressed numbers and/or characters shall be a minimum of three inches in height and one and one-half inches in width. Address numbers and characters for businesses shall be a minimum of four inches in height and two inches in width. All numbers or characters shall be reflective on a contrasting background so as to be clearly visible. It is recommended to use white reflective numbers and/or characters on a green or blue background. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 6) 
Sec. 22-177. - Proper maintenance. 
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to properly maintain their 911 address sign. Tall grass or bushes are to be kept cut and/or trimmed so as not to obstruct the signs. Also, any faded or missing characters and/or numbers shall be replaced so that the location may be located easily and at all times by emergency personnel. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 7) 
Sec. 22-178. - Duty of owner; notification; and enforcement. 
The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. Failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon such violation, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, by mailing to his last known address of record, specifying the nature of such violation and requiring that such violation be remedied and brought into compliance within ten days after receipt of such notice. Notification shall be made by the designated code enforcement officer and/or the Johnson County Sheriff's Office. 
Any property owner who does not comply with this article shall be in violation of this article and said violation shall result in a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 plus the cost of enforcement and prosecution. Said prosecution will be pursued through the Magistrate Court of Johnson County, Georgia. The designated code enforcement officer and/or the Johnson County Sheriff's Office shall be responsible for enforcement of this provision. Warnings shall be issued for the first violation during the one year period following adoption of this article. Penalties shall be imposed for any violation following a warning or any violation occurring in the second or subsequent years. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, alter, or deface any posted 911 Address Sign in Johnson County. Violators shall be subject to prosecution. Upon conviction, the violator will be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 plus the cost of enforcement and prosecution. Said prosecution shall be pursued through the Magistrate Court of Johnson County. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2011(2), § 8) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-19. - Findings of fact. 
The wetlands within the county are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 6.1) 
Sec. 26-20. - Reference map. 
The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in the county and to be regulated areas under this article will be the US Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Johnson County. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the US Army Corps of Engineers, and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by that agency. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 6.2) 
Secs. 26-21—26-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-42. - Activity, use, development requirements. 
No activity or use, except those identified in section 26-43, shall be allowed within wetlands without a permit under this article. The following activities or uses permitted under section 404 of the US Clean Water Act may receive a local permit once any required federal permit, or if appropriate, letter of permission/determination is obtained, as described in this section, and any other applicable provisions of this article have been satisfied: 
(1)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this particular article is necessary. 
(2)  If there is a determination, in the administration of this article, that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands that appear to be under the jurisdiction of section 404 of the US Clean Water Act, a US Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this article. 
(3)  If a US Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this article will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at their own expense, obtains either a section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the US Army Corps of Engineers that no federal permit is required. 
(4)  No action in the administration of this article, or no local permit issued, pursuant to this division, relieves the landowner from any federal or state permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 6.3) 
Sec. 26-43. - Uses not requiring a permit. 
The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the county to the extent they are not prohibited by any other article or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities; however, section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.) 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require a section 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 6.4) 
Sec. 26-44. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the state's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 6.5) 
Secs. 26-45—26-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-62. - Findings of fact. 
Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank effluents, contribute to deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 7.1) 
Sec. 26-63. - Reference map. 
The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the county to be regulated areas under this article is the state department of natural resources' Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 7.2) 
Secs. 26-64—26-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-83. - Uses; additional requirements. 
All uses, except those identified in section 26-84 and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district, are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)  All new aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)  All single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the state department of human resources manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this article in appendix 1). The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. 
(3)  All lots shall have a minimum width of 150 feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located. 
(4)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other on-site sewage management system unless the county health department first approves the proposed on-site sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and the provisions of this article. 
(5)  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
(6)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the US Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 7.3) 
Sec. 26-84. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
(1)  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities. 
(2)  New facilities handling 10,000 pounds or more of hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, on any one day. 
(3)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 7.4) 
Secs. 26-85—26-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAJOR RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-112. - Findings of fact. 
Perennial river or watercourses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second are of vital importance to the state in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 8.1) 
Sec. 26-113. - District delineation. 
Protected rivers as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, includes any perennial river or watercourses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Oconee River, through the county, meets this criterion. A protected river corridor and a protective 100-foot vegetation buffer are hereby established along the entire length of this river within the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank within the county jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a 100-foot buffer of the river bank except for the permitted uses in section 26-138. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 8.2) 
Secs. 26-114—26-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-138. - Permitted uses. 
No development, or construction, or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the 100-foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the county health department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drain field is located outside of the 100-foot buffer area. 
(2)  Any residential uses existing or under construction prior to the adoption of these local protection articles provided the use has an on-site sewage management construction permit issued by the county health department prior to the date of adoption of these local protection articles. 
(3)  Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of these local protection articles, providing they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other federal and state environmental regulations. 
(4)  Road and utility crossings, providing the construction of these crossings meets the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any local requirements, if stricter. 
(5)  Timber production and harvesting, providing it is consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, provided it is consistent with the best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission, and all other state and federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the state department of agriculture; and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(7)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(8)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(9)  Wastewater treatment. 
(10)  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 8.3) 
Sec. 26-139. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the state's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(2)  Hazardous or solid waste landfills. 
(3)  Septic tank drain fields within the 100-foot buffer area under any circumstance. 
(4)  Septic tanks within the 100-foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings that are permitted under and comply with section 26-138(1). 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 8.4) 
Secs. 26-140—26-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-162. - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved that is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, the county board of commissioners shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 9) 
Sec. 26-163. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, landowner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property that holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The county board of commissioners may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 10) 
Sec. 26-164. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The county board of commissioners or the county board of health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this chapter before the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 11) 
Sec. 26-165. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever the provisions of this article and those of some other ordinace or statute apply to the same subject matter, that provision requiring the highest, or most strict, standard shall govern. All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 13) 
Secs. 26-166—26-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-186. - Short title. 
This article will be known as the "Johnson County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law." 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § I) 
Sec. 26-187. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures that, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. (See "Properly designed.") 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation that facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading refers to altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in this article. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality, that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq. That addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in that colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6, subsection (b). 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Central Georgia soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20 et. Seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measure means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and that has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § II) 
Sec. 26-188. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, Mineral Resources and Caves Act. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities that result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection (4); provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this article. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection (4), there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of article 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary for first order trout waters that are streams into which no other streams flow, except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of division II of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in this article, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection (8). The term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project that involves less than one acre, that involves land disturbing activity, and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project that is not specifically exempted in this section. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority that disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § III) 
Secs. 26-189—26-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 26-205. - Purpose and intent. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities that are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this division. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 26-206. - Compliance required for land disturbing activity; definitions. 
(a)  Proper design, installation, maintenance. Best management practices as set forth in this division shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this division or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper design and properly designed mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 26-207. - Violations. 
(a)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes, that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(b)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(c)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 26-208. - Rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations, articles, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, that are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection (8), a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this division; 
(15)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, article 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection (15). The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams that discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 26-209. - Additional stream buffer requirements. 
Nothing contained in this division shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, articles, or resolutions that contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 26-206 and 26-208. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 26-210. - Injury to property of another; no presumption of violation. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this division or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IV) 
Secs. 26-211—26-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-221. - Responsibilities. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning, stormwater management, subdivision, and flood damage prevention provisions, this article VI, and other articles that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority; however, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § V) 
Sec. 26-222. - Permit—Application process. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the issuing authority of the county to perform such activity. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of this article. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(c)  A fee in the amount established from time to time by the board of commissioners shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(d)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity that is required to give notice, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by this article and bonding, if required, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement that allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(f)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(g)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an article or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § V) 
Sec. 26-223. - Same—Procedures. 
(a)  Issuance, denial. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(b)  Plan compliance, approval. The local issuing authority shall issue no permit unless the district has approved the erosion and sedimentation control plan and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 26-208(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 26-222(e) are met and all articles and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  Phase development. If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation, modification. The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § V) 
Sec. 26-224. - Minimum plan requirements. 
Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements of this division. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria that conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local articles and state laws. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § V) 
Sec. 26-225. - Data required for site plan. 
The following information shall be required for a site plan: 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(5)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including the statement in bold letters that "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year round seeding. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times." If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. that might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, article 6. 
Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § V) 
Sec. 26-226. - Failure to obtain permit. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VII) 
Secs. 26-227—26-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-246. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities, for permits that have been issued, to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. In addition, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities that have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the erosion and sedimentation control program of the county or the municipality. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request an investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities, that have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's article and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its articles or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VI) 
Sec. 26-247. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(d)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 26-248. - Noncompliance; bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of this article. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 26-249. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties that can be assessed for violations of county articles, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county articles approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 26-250. - Education and certification. 
All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-251. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any article; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county commission within ten days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IX) 
Sec. 26-252. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § IX) 
Sec. 26-253. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2003, § X) 
Secs. 26-254—26-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 3, 2010, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 26-301—26-305. 

Sec. 26-301. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2010, § A-1) 
Sec. 26-302. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The county code enforcement officer shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2010, § A-2) 
Sec. 26-303. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2010, § A-3) 
Sec. 26-304. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of the Johnson County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2010, § A-4) 
Sec. 26-305. - Effective date. 
This article shall go into effect on January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2010, § A-5) 
Chapter 30 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 31, 2010, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 30-18—30-38, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. of 7-13-1998, art. 1, §§ B—D, art. 2, §§ A—H, art. 3, §§ A—C, art. 4, §§ A—E, arts. 5, 6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-18. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 30-19. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Johnson County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 30-20. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 30-21. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 30-22. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Johnson County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 30-23. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Johnson County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: County administrator's office. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 30-24. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 30-25. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 30-26. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 30-27. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 30-28. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Johnson County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 30-29. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Johnson County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 30-30. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of commissioners as established by Johnson County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Johnson County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 5) 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 30-23. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before 12/17/2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 07/13/1998. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 12/17/2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 07/13/1998 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 07/13/1998. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 6) 
Secs. 30-32—30-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-51. - Designation of article administrator. 
The Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 30-52. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Johnson County Tax Assessor on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 30-72(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 30-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 30-23, then the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 30-52(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 30-52(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 30-52(1)c and section 30-72(2) or section 30-74(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 30-54—30-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 30-71. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 30-72. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 30-71(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 30-53(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 30-71(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 30-72(3)a., c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-23 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if section 30-72(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 30-73. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-23, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 30-23, then the Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 30-71(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 30-74. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-23, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 30-72. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 30-75. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-23, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 30-71(4), "elevated buildings." 
The Johnson County Code Enforcement Officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 30-52. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 30-76. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 30-77. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(1), Art. 4, § G) 
Chapter 34 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED DETECTION DEVICES 

Sec. 34-19. - Purpose and intent. 
The board of commissioners of the county, after consulting with the sheriff of the county, has determined that it would be in the best interest of the county to authorize the use of state approved radar as a speed detection device in the county. 
(Res. of 3-23-1993) 
Sec. 34-20. - Devices authorized. 
The board of commissioners of the county authorizes the sheriff of the county to use radar as a speed detection device in the county. 
(Res. of 3-23-1993) 
State Law reference— Use of speed detection devices must be approved by governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Secs. 34-21—34-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY JAIL FUND 

Sec. 34-44. - Purpose and intent. 
The county needs to utilize all sources of revenue available to it, and O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93 provides for an additional penalty of ten percent to be added to all criminal fines imposed by the county courts, the moneys realized from the additional penalties to be used exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing of the county jail. 
(Res. of 2-6-1990) 
State Law reference— Duty to adopt resolute requiring imposition and collection of additional penalty, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92. 
Sec. 34-45. - Additional penalties imposed. 
The county commissioners place the provisions of the Jail Construction and Staffing Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93 et seq.) into effect and direct that said act be carried out in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(Res. of 2-6-1990) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - [Site permit requirements.] 
On and after the effective date of this section, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor wishing to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or move a single family or multi-family residence, building, shed, pump-house, pole-barn, or other structure, free standing or otherwise, within the geographical boundaries of Johnson County, whether the same be site built, modular, or manufactured, shall apply for a building permit at the Johnson County Tax Assessor's Office on the official form developed therefore. 
At minimum, the application shall state the name of the property owner, the contractor or agent performing the work if different than the owner, the seller of the home if different than the property owner, and the map and parcel number upon which the structure is to be located. The permit shall be displayed conspicuously on the property until such time as the Johnson County Tax Assessor's office has made a final inspection after completion of the project. 
If the construction is to be performed within the limits of an incorporated municipality and said municipality requires a similar permit then no permit from the Johnson County Tax Assessor's Office shall be required. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (O.C.G.A. § 36-13-11). Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any provision of this section is committed or continued. (O.C.G.A. § 36-13-12). Violators shall be prosecuted by the Johnson County Tax Assessor in the Magistrate Court of the county without a jury. Convictions shall be punishable by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-12). 
(Ord. of 8-31-2010(2)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 31, 2010, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 38-1. 
Secs. 38-2—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME SITE PERMITS 

Sec. 38-19. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is to ensure for taxation purposes that each mobile/manufactured home relocated into or within the county is titled as required by law; to assist the tax assessors in locating and identifying said structures located in the county for valuation and taxation; to require the acquisition of a location permit prior to relocating a mobile home into or within the county; and to prohibit public utilities from furnishing services to said structures for which no location permit has been issued; to provide for the enforcement and for punitive action against violators of this article; repealing conflicting ordinances, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-3) 
Sec. 38-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a mobile home or manufactured home as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(3), including such mobile home that is permanently located on property owned by the owner of such mobile home or his or her spouse. 
Sec. 38-21. - Subject to taxation. 
Every mobile home owned in the county on January 1 is subject to ad valorem taxation by the county. Taxes shall be charged against the owner of the mobile home, if known, and if unknown against the specific mobile home. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-2) 
Sec. 38-22. - Requirements for mobile home permit. 
(a)  Each year every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation in the county on or before May 1 or at the time of the first sale or transfer before May 1 shall pay all taxes due to the tax commissioner and obtain a mobile home location permit/decal as evidence of payment. The permit/decal must be prominently displayed in a manner to make it clearly visible to the code enforcement/tax appraisal personnel. 
(b)  Any mobile home transferred into the county on or after January 1 must have attached and displayed a mobile home decal from the county of origin or evidence of payment of all appropriate taxes being paid. Upon the sale of a new mobile home, the purchaser shall provide to the tax commissioner a PT-41 as proof of all previous taxes being paid. At that time and upon presentation of the required board of health certifications, and a copy of the permit required by the state fire insurance commissioner under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-64, the tax commissioner will issue a mobile home permit/decal. 
(c)  Mobile homes being located, relocated or transferred into the county shall be issued a mobile home permit by the tax commissioner require: 
(1)  Written proof that the county board of health has approved the individual sewage disposal system used or to be used in connection with said home. This section shall not apply to renewal permits, provided there has been no relocation of the home since the last permit was issued nor shall this section apply to homes where municipal water and sewage services are provided. Proof of compliance with this section shall mean a written permit issued by the county board of health inspector, or his agent, stating that authorized officials of the health department have approved the sewage disposal system. The permit issued by the health department must contain a physical location and/or street address of the structure sufficient to enable the tax commissioner to verify the location of such structure and issue a permit. The street address must be listed according to the numbering system in effect at the time of the application. The county board of health is prohibited from issuing a permit for an initial individual sewage disposal system for any mobile home that was constructed before June 15, 1976, or those not bearing a label certifying construction in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(2)  Certification by the county board of health that the site is or will remain in compliance with the environmental conservation, on site sewage management and permit law of the county relating to lot size. 
(3)  A copy of the permit required by the state fire insurance commissioner under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-64, 
(d)  No mobile home may be transferred into, within or first located in the county without a mobile home location permit/decal. Any transporter or mobile home dealer who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions and penalties under section 38-32 of this article. 
(e)  This article shall apply to all mobile homes transferred into a mobile home park or the expansion or creation of a mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Res. of 7-9-2001; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-3) 
Sec. 38-23. - Design of permit. 
(a)  The mobile home location permit shall be in the color and form prescribed each year by the tax commissioner and shall reflect Johnson County as the county of issuance and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. 
(b)  The county tax commissioner is hereby authorized to have designed a permanent location permit for issuance to owners of mobile homes who qualify for homestead exemption. These homes are located on property owned and occupied by the owner and are included as part of the owner's parcel value on the regular tax digest. Each decal shall be sequentially numbered for purposes of control. Once issued, the decal need not be replaced so long as the mobile home stays in place and the ownership and occupancy of the property remains unchanged. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-3) 
Sec. 38-24. - Fees. 
(a)  For mobile homes located in the county on January 1, the annual fee for the location permit (other than permanent) shall be based upon the tax assessed value of the home, and shall be payable to the tax commissioner. 
(b)  There shall be no charge for the initial location permit issued to the owner of the mobile home for the relocation of said home into or within the county after January 1. If a pre-owned mobile home is brought into the county from another county, the owner shall present proof, in a form satisfactory to the tax commissioner, that ad valorem taxes have been paid for the previous year for which taxes were due. Upon presentation of satisfactory proof that taxes have been paid and the required board of health certifications, the owner shall be issued a location permit for the county for the current year at no charge and the owner shall be taxed as assessed by the county board of assessors for the next tax year. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-4) 
Sec. 38-25. - Construction and safety standards. 
(a)  No person shall be granted approval to locate or relocate, within the limits of the county, for use as a residence, any mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976, or those not bearing a label certifying construction in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Structures manufactured before this date may be relocated for storage use only. 
(b)  Only buildings or other structures, which were designed for human occupancy, can be sold or leased for that purpose within the unincorporated areas of the county. The board of health will issue no permits that would allow any such structure to be used for human habitation. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-5) 
Sec. 38-26. - County office responsibilities. 
(a)  The county appraisal staff shall forward to the tax commissioner and the code enforcement officer of the county a list of all mobile homes discovered in the county that are not displaying the required permit/decal. Such list shall contain the information required to locate and identify each mobile home. The code enforcement officer is charged with the issuance of a citation to the owner of each mobile home for which a mobile home permit/decal is not attached. Such citation shall be in furtherance of section 38-31 of this article. 
(b)  On the tenth day of each month or as agreed upon in writing by the tax commissioner and the board of assessors the tax commissioner shall forward to the board of assessors all mobile homes for which location permits/decals were issued and all mobile homes that were returned for taxation. In no event shall this report be made less then once per year and no later then October 10. The report shall include all information as required by state department of revenue rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-6) 
Sec. 38-27. - Occupancy. 
No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy the same as a residence unless a location permit has been obtained or is in the process of being obtained and with the permission of the tax commissioner and is displayed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-7) 
Sec. 38-28. - Mobile home parks. 
(a)  No owner or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be moved into the confines of such park for residential use unless the permit, required by this article, shall have been obtained and properly displayed. 
(b)  Every person or other entity owning or operating a mobile park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of mobile homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax commissioner of the county a complete listing as of January 1 of all mobile homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the owner. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-8) 
Sec. 38-29. - On-site sewage management systems. 
All mobile home parks must comply with the provisions of article II, chapter 66 of this Code regarding on-site sewage management. 
Sec. 38-30. - Utilities. 
No person, utility, city or town supplying electricity, gas or water into, onto, or for the use of any mobile home shall provide utility service for such structure until the owner of same has obtained and is displaying a current year's permit as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-9) 
Sec. 38-31. - Inspections and code enforcement 
It shall be the duty of the designated agent so selected and appointed as such under O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 to issue citations to owners failing to properly display mobile home location permits. The citation will advise the owner, if known, or occupant, if the owner is not known, of the nature of the violation and will provide the owner/occupant 15 days to comply with the mobile home location permit requirements. The notice shall also describe the penalty under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493 for failure to properly display such decal. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-10) 
Sec. 38-32. - Citations and penalties 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the county property appraisal staff to annually inspect each mobile home in the county to determine if the owner is properly displaying the required permit/decal. In addition, the county code enforcement officer shall be charged with assisting in the determination of compliance. Both groups are authorized, under this article, with the issuance of a citation to an owner who fails to comply with this article. 
(b)  Any person or other entity that does any act prohibited by this article or fails to discharge any duty imposed hereby shall be subject to the imposition of a fine and/or confinement for such offense according to the following schedule: 

 
(c)  All violations listed in this section will be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county in the manner prescribed for the enforcement of county ordinances. Applicable court costs will be payable in addition to imposed fines and other punitive action. 
(d)  The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction for the disposition of offences arising out of any violation of this article. The owner of occupant of any mobile home who fails to obtain and display the current location permit shall also be subject to the injunctive powers of any court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1997; Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-11) 
Sec. 38-33. - Penalties. 
A violation of any of these provisions shall be punishable in the magistrate court of the county as set forth in § 1-8 of this Code. Such punishment shall apply equally to the owner and/or occupant of the structure and each day in which such a prohibited structure is occupied shall constitute a separate violation punishable in the manner set forth herein. 
(Res. of 7-9-2001) 
Secs. 38-34—38-54. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as provide in section 1-8 of this Code. 
Secs. 42-2—42-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 

Sec. 42-20. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct, which is prohibited, when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence of threats of bodily harm; 
(4)  Causes, provokes, or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another or public property; 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others and causes, provokes, or engages in a fight or brawl; 
(6)  Collects with others in bodies or in crowds and engages in unlawful activities; 
(7)  Assembles or congregates with another or others and engages or attempts to engage in gaming; 
(8)  Frequents any public place and obtains money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempts to do so; 
(9)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(10)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. 16-11-39. 
Sec. 42-21. - Disorderly public drunkenness. 
It is prohibited for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, if his condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 42-22. - Disturbance of meeting, gathering, or procession. 
It is prohibited for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 42-23. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling, which is prohibited, when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A § 16-11-36. 
Secs. 42-24—42-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 

Sec. 42-50. - Permit required. 
No person shall hold a gathering or assemblage of people on the grounds or in the buildings of the public courthouse square of the county without first having obtained permission from the county commission to do so. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1980) 
Sec. 42-51. - Number of simultaneous assemblages limited. 
Permission shall not be granted to two or more separate groups or organizations to hold such gatherings or assemblages during the same period of time. The first such group or organization to apply shall have priority in the consideration of applications. 
(Ord. of 4-19-1980) 
Sec. 42-52. - Application for permit. 
An application for a permit under this article shall be in writing and be filed with the board at least five days prior to the date the gathering or assemblage is proposed to be held. Applications shall be made on forms furnished by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-19-1980) 
Sec. 42-53. - Hours of use in public square limited. 
Permits shall not be granted for the use of the grounds of said public square for any gathering or assemblage which commences in or extends into the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
(Ord. of 4-19-1980) 
Chapter 46 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-19. - Creation; name. 
There is need and necessity for a county development authority as permitted by the Georgia Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., to function, exist and be operated in and for the county. There is hereby activated, created and organized such an authority, to be known as the development authority of the county. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 101) 
Sec. 46-20. - Powers and authority. 
The development authority of the county, shall be deemed to exercise public and essential governmental functions and shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following powers: to sue and to be sued; to plead and to be impleaded; to have a seal and to alter the same; to acquire, own, hold lease and dispose of real property; to make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority; to acquire by the right of eminent domain any property essential to the purpose of the authority; to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of any real or personal property or interest therein; to mortgage, pledge or assign any revenues, including tolls, charges or fees received by the authority; to issue certificates of indebtedness for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the duties of the authority, providing such certificates shall not extend beyond a period of 40 years from the date of issuance thereof and provided further that such certificates shall be repayable from the revenues realized from the project or any part thereof; to borrow money for any corporate purposes; to appoint officers, agents and employees; to make use of any facilities afforded by the federal government, the state, and the county, or any agencies; of instrumentalities thereof, and to have the power and to perform all functions as authorized and provided by law. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 102) 
Sec. 46-21. - Geographical area. 
The geographical area of the development authority of the county shall be the entirety of the county. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 103) 
Sec. 46-22. - Board of directors. 
(a)  The development authority of the county shall consist of a board of seven directors. These directors shall, to the extent possible, fairly represent the racial, socioeconomic, and geographical composition of the county. All appointments shall be made in accordance with this policy. To provide for staggered term expirations, the original appointments of three of the directors shall be for a term of six years. The original appointments of two directors shall be for a term of four years. The original appointments of the two directors shall be for a term of two years.Thereafter, the terms of all directors shall be six year terms. All terms begin on January 1 of the appropriate year. 
(b)  The directors shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman, and shall also elect a secretary and treasurer. The treasurer need not be a director. Directors of the development authority of the county shall be residents and taxpayers of the county and not more than one of them shall be an officer or employee of the county. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 104) 
Sec. 46-23. - Compensation of directors. 
The directors shall receive no compensation for their services but they shall be entitled to reimbursement for any actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 105) 
Sec. 46-24. - Perpetual existence. 
The development authority of the county shall have perpetual existence. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 106) 
Sec. 46-25. - Liability. 
No director or other person executing certificates or other obligations on behalf of the development authority of the county, shall be personally liable thereon. 
(Res. of 1-12-1988, § 107) 
Secs. 46-26—46-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE DELIVERY STRATEGY DISPUTE RESOLUTION 

Sec. 46-54. - Purpose and intent. 
The county and the cities of Wrightsville, Kite, and Adrian have implemented the following process for resolving land use disputes concerning annexation. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 46-55. - Notification to county. 
Prior to initiating any formal annexation activities, the city will notify the county government of a proposed annexation and provide information on location of property, size of area, and proposed land use or zoning classification (if applicable) of the property upon annexation. Within 14 working days following receipt of the above information, the county will forward to the city a statement either: 
(1)  Indicating that the county has no objection to the proposed land use for the property; or 
(2)  Describing its bona fide objection to the city's proposed land use classification, providing supporting information, and listing any possible stipulations or conditions that would alleviate the county's objection. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 46-56. - No objection; failure to respond. 
If the county has no objection to the city's proposed land use or zoning classification, the city is free to proceed with the annexation. If the county fails to respond to the city's notice in writing within the deadline, the city is free to proceed with the annexation and the county loses its right to invoke the dispute resolution process, stop the annexation or object to land use changes after the annexation. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 46-57. - Notice to city of objection. 
If the county notifies the city that it has a bona fide land use classification objection the city will respond to the county in writing within 14 working days of receiving the county's objection by either: 
(1)  Agreeing to implement the county's stipulations and conditions and thereby resolving the county's objection; 
(2)  Agreeing with the county and stopping action on the proposed annexation; 
(3)  Disagreeing that the county's objection are bona fide and notifying the county that the city will seek a declaratory judgment in court; or 
(4)  Initiating a 30-day (maximum) mediation process to discuss possible compromises. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 46-58. - Mediation; appointment of mediator; schedule; costs. 
(a)  If the city initiates mediation, the city and county will agree on a mediator, mediation schedule and determine participants in the mediation. The city and county agree to share equally any costs associated with the mediation. 
(b)  If no resolution of the county's bona fide land use classification objection results from the mediation, the city will not proceed with the proposed annexation. 
(c)  If the city and county reach agreement by mediation or otherwise, they will draft an annexation agreement for execution by the city and county governments and the property owner. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 46-59. - Annexation agreement binding. 
Regardless of future changes in land use or zoning classification, any site-specific mitigation or enhancement measures or site-design stipulations included in the agreement will be binding on all parties for the duration of the annexation agreement. The agreement shall become final when signed by the city, the county and the property owner. 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, art. II) 
Chapter 50 - ROADS AND BRIDGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROAD DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 50-19. - Intent. 
This article outlines the design and construction standards for public and private roads constructed in subdivision of property in the county. Such standards, at a minimum, shall comply with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Road, latest edition, and state department of transportation standards. It shall also establish the accepted standards for the acceptance of a private road into the county-maintained road system. It shall also define the required recordation of disclosure of private road not meeting public road requirements and the language required in deeds of conveyance served by private roads. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 50-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate and protect the public road system in the county and provide a method of conversion for private to public roads. The subdivision approval process shall not be construed for any other purpose. The county reserves the right to enforce compliance with our mobile home/subdivision article and the erosion and sedimentation control article. Those ordinances are incorporated with and into this article. Any conflicts shall be resolved by the implementation of the most restrictive covenant. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 50-21. - Road standards. 
Any road before approval for acceptance in the county-maintained road system must conform to the standards set forth in this article. Person desiring to place a road on the county road system must apply, in writing, to the board of commissioners with a plat of survey attached containing the following information: 
(1)  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of size, design and requirements for the predevelopment review by the county health department as contained in section 66-93 of the county Code and shall also have the following information: 
a.  Description: 
1.  Proposed name of subdivision, including unit, phase, and lines separating phases and/or units. 
2.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of subdivider, engineer, landscape architect, and surveyor. 
3.  Graphic scale, north arrow, and date; the north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
4.  Location map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area, including directions and distances to readily identifiable landmarks in the surrounding area. 
5.  Acreage to be subdivided. 
6.  Proposed number of lots. 
7.  Proposed density in dwellings per acre (gross). 
8.  Total lineal feet of proposed roads (per phase and total). 
b.  Existing conditions: 
1.  Topographic contours and vertical intervals of not more than two feet when a new road is involved in a subdivision including outline of wooded areas, vegetation, and surface drainage. 
2.  Topographic data shall be based on field survey or aerial survey. 
3.  Soil conditions according to US Soil Conservation Service Classifications Manual. 
4.  Deed record names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
5.  In case of a resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed resubdivision imposed thereon. 
6.  Location of streams, lakes, wetlands, and land subject to a 100-year flood hazard, including contour elevations. State if elevations are taken from a surveyed stream on a FEMA map or if the elevations are from an independent study (HEC-2, QUICK-2, etc.). Wetland areas shall be field located. 
7.  Notation that live streams and/or wetlands lie (do not lie) within this subdivision, or unit and phase. Provide a copy of wetlands delineation report from a registered soil scientist in the state. 
8.  State whether or not a project is in a 100-year floodplain; whether or not wetlands exist on the site; or, if the area lies within portions of the limited development area or the water quality critical area of any watershed protection district. 
9.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width, and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. 
10.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads with sizes, grades, and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. 
11.  Existing drainage patterns. The boundaries of the predeveloped drainage basins shall be shown on a map. The map shall include the number of acres in each basin, the predeveloped runoff coefficient, and the time of concentration. 
c.  Proposed conditions: 
1.  Layout and names of proposed roads, alleys, public walkways/bikeways (i.e., sidewalks, trails, paths, bicycle facilities), with width of pavement and rights-of-way. 
2.  Layout of all lots, including building setback lines and lot dimensions, including lot area. Lots with detention ponds must meet minimum area requirements outside the area of the detention pond. Show all existing and proposed easements. Show drainage easements for storm drainage pipes which cross individual lots. 
3.  Flood elevations on any lots within a 100-year flood hazard area. In addition, the foundation elevation that is a minimum of one foot above the established 100-year flood elevation shall be shown. This data may be shown either on the lot layout or in tabular form. 
4.  Construction plans of roads including typical cross section and grade profiles. Show percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. The minimum centerline stopping sight distance for interior roads is 200 feet. 
5.  Improvements construction plan of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size, and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
6.  Show the centerline stopping distance for all points of access onto county roads. Show posted speed limit of existing county roads. 
7.  Construction plans of storm drainage systems with pipe sizes, length, grade, location of outlets, runoff and velocity calculations, etc. All storm drainage systems carrying off-site runoff shall be designed for the 100-year storm event. All storm pipes within the county right-of-way or proposed county right-of-way for roads shall meet county standards. 
8.  Construction plan of improvements in the water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and all appurtenances if scheduled. 
9.  Draft of proposed deed restrictions to be imposed. 
10.  Easements for drainage and future sanitary sewers along all side and rear lot lines. 
11.  Proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
12.  Documentation of compliance with state or federal stormwater management requirements. 
13.  All geometric design standards promulgated pursuant to section 50-22(b). 
(2)  Road construction plans must be approved by the board of commissioners before construction begins. 
(3)  A minimum of an 80-foot right-of-way must be granted to the county, certified by an attorney. Conveyance must be in compliance with subsection (14) of this section 
(4)  Adequate drainage must be provided with side drain fields a minimum of 15 inches and across drains a minimum of 18 inches. 
(5)  All roadbeds connecting with county maintained dirt roads must be stabilized with six inches of subbase mix, at least eight inches of approved topsoil or state department of transportation (DOT) standard sand-clay mix with proper compaction of the roadbed, being 100 percent compaction and covered with a minimum of two inches of aggregate surface course. Landowner or developer will provide a soil test run by an approved laboratory. 
(6)  All roadbeds connecting to county maintained paved roads where the individual parcels are six acres or more shall at a minimum have roadbeds in compliance with subsection (5) of this section. The area of right-of-way connecting the proposed road to the county maintained system paved road must have adequate drainage, a pipe of designated specifications as approved by the department of transportation and paved to the department of transportation specifications. All cost associated with compliance of this section shall be paid by the landowner. 
(7)  All roadbeds connecting subdivisions where individual parcels are less then six acres to county maintained paved roads must be stabilized with six inches of subbase mix, at least eight inches of approved topsoil. DOT standard sand-clay mix or Chert base with proper compaction of the roadbed being 100 percent compaction and paved with a triple surface treatment, STN size 5,7, & 89, GP 1 or 2. These road sections must comply with the typical DOT grading, drainage, base and surface section. The area of right-of-way connecting the proposed road to the county maintained system paved road must have adequate drainage, a pipe of designated specifications as approved by the department of transportation and paved to the department of transportation specifications. All cost associated with compliance of this section shall be paid by the landowner. 
(8)  All roadbeds connecting with a state or federal highway must meet the requirements of this section and the state DOT specification and approval process for connections to a state maintained road. 
(9)  Right-of-way will be cleared of all stumps, limbs and foreign materials. All slopes and shoulders shall have approved grassing. 
(10)  Each roadbed shall be a minimum of 24 feet or as required by DOT standards as applicable. 
(11)  Landowner or developer shall provide maintenance on the road for a minimum period of one year and shall continue until accepted by the county. 
(12)  Prior to the expiration of one year, the county will inspect the road, provide owner with a list of any defects found, and owner will correct defects at owner's expense. Once the road is approved by the county, the road can then be deeded to the county (subsection (14) of this section) and placed on the county road system. 
(13)  All construction work, stabilization cost, legal work, survey expenses and all other expenses shall be the expense of the landowner/developer. 
(14)  Subdivision roads and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted and dedicated by the county only upon the delivery to the board of commissioners of the general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the county board of commissioners certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by resolution of the board of commissioners, a certified copy of which shall be attached to both the deed of dedication and the final plat. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 17-1-1) 
Sec. 50-22. - New subdivisions. 
(a)  All developers and property owners when subdividing any land parcel into smaller individual parcels shall submit to the board of commissioners, for approval, a copy of the proposed surveyed plat of the entire parcel when any part of the total parcel will have any proposed, current or future, public or private road, drive or access that connects to the state highway system, county maintained road system, or any private arterial leading to the county road system. Approval of plats by the board of commissioners will be based on meeting all requirements of this article, all private roads meeting the minimum standards as outlined in this article and the necessary statements/disclosures being recorded with the plats and the deeds of conveyance. 
(b)  Any road intersecting with a state road, county maintained road or an arterial leading to a county maintained road must meet the following geometric design standards: 
(1)  Geometric design standards for roads and entrances to county or public roads including deceleration lane. 
(2)  Road design standards: 

 
(3)  Entrance to county or public roads. 
(4)  The sight distance in each direction shall be certified by a land surveyor. The sight distance shall be based on the posted speed limit of the serving road or highway as follows: 

 
(5)  Surface types and widths of all roads. 
(6)  Scale not less than one inch equals 20 feet. 
(c)  All proposed storm drainage structures, water lines, and signage. 
(d)  Radius joining road surfaces. (Minimum=50 feet, or 30 feet if a deceleration lane is installed). 
(e)  Deceleration lane. A deceleration lane is required for any development on arterial or collector roads proposed for over 50 lots. Minimum length for the deceleration lane shall be 50 feet for a development with 50 or more lots, 100 feet for a development with 100 or more lots and 150 feet for a deceleration lane for developments with 150 or more lots. Larger developments shall be as directed by the road department per DOT standards. A deceleration lane is mandatory for any subdivision entrance in a blind spot. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 17-1-2) 
Sec. 50-23. - Private roads. 
(a)  Private roads may, upon application, be permitted by the board of commissioners within subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this section. No final plat involving a private road shall be approved unless final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  All private roads in the subdivision must be registered on the surveyed plat of the subdivision. All names for private roads shall be submitted to the office of the tax assessor 911 division for approval. 
(c)  All roads must conform to the minimum standards for acceptance as a county road as required in this article. 
(d)  The plat and conveyance deeds of a subdivision containing roads not yet meeting county standards and accepted as a county road must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Easements for private roads shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility easements along with the name of said private road. Said easement shall at a minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street. Easements shall not be included in the calculation of minimum lot sizes established by local land-use and septic-tank regulations. 
(f)  Before a subdivision or development plat that is served by private roads or proposed public roads that currently do not meet public road requirements will be approved by the board of commissioners, there must be recorded in the public records in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county a statement/disclosure to the effect that the roads lying within the development are private in ownership and do not currently and will not ever meet the requirements applicable to converting the roads from private ownership and maintenance to public ownership and maintenance. The statement/disclosure must be apart and separate from any restrictions/covenants that are applicable to the development and shall also be recorded with the subdivision plat. This statement/disclosure may be modified by all of the roads being brought into compliance and the acceptance of all subdivision private roads into the county maintained system. 
(g)  All deeds of conveyance for individual lots within a development that contains nonaccepted private roads or proposed public roads that currently do not meet public road requirements shall also insert the following language on all deeds of conveyances for individual lots in prominent bold capital letters: 
"THE GRANTEE HEREIN ACKNOWLEDGES THAT ANY AND ALL MEANS OF INGRESS AND EGRESS TO THE PROPERTY CONVEYED HEREIN ALONG WITH THE ROADS/STREETS OF THE SUBDIVISION, AS OUTLINED ON THE PLAT OF SAID SUBDIVISION, ARE PRIVATE ROADS AND ARE NEITHER MAINTAINED BY JOHNSON COUNTY NOR CONSIDERED PART OF THE ROAD SYSTEM OF JOHNSON COUNTY. THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE UPKEEP AND MAINTENANCE OF THE ROADS SHOWN THEREON ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE INDIVIDUAL HOMEOWNERS OR THROUGH THE SUBDIVISION'S HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION AND NOT JOHNSON COUNTY." 
(h)  The clerk of courts of the county shall not accept for recording any subdivision plat that contains proposed public or private roads accessing the county maintained road system without the approval of the board of commissioners and containing the above language if required. The clerk of court shall not record any deed of conveyance that does not contain the required language. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 17-1-3) 
Sec. 50-24. - Approval required before construction begins. 
No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision until written approval of plans by the board of commissioners certifying compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 17-1-4) 
Sec. 50-25. - Compliance and penalties. 
(a)  All issues of compliance of this article shall fall under the jurisdiction of the magistrate court of the county. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity that does any act prohibited by this article or fails to discharge any duty imposed in this article shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Applicable court costs will be payable in addition to imposed fines and other punitive action. 
(b)  Violators of this article shall also be subject to the injunctive powers of any court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 17-1-4) 
Secs. 50-26—50-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 50-54. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a policy concerning the county's involvement in the installation of driveways on state and county roads, to preclude involvement in the installation of driveways for commercial and forestry management, to provide for a resolution of land use for the purpose of this article, to provide for collection of fees, and for other purposes of the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 50-55. - Limited assistance program. 
The county will engage in a limited assistance program for residential driveways to assist homeowners and to provide for proper drainage and sedimentation/erosion control. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1(17-2-1)) 
Sec. 50-56. - Driveways—County roads. 
Residential driveways will be placed on county roads to the point of the right-of-way. The homeowner must acquire a septic tank permit from the county health department certifying that the property can support a single-family residence. If a residence is not built or located on the property within two years of the work then the entire cost of the driveway will be charged to the landowner. The property owner will be responsible for the purchase of a pipe either from the county or adhering to the county driveway pipe specifications as determined by the road superintendent. The county will provide two-ten-ton loads of dirt for the driveway. Any fill dirt over and above that quantity will be charged to the homeowner at the current market rate plus haul charge. Any total man hours over six hours and equipment usage over three hours will be charged to the homeowner at the hourly rate of the employee and the FEMA schedule for equipment usage. The road superintendent will provide an estimate of the work to be performed. The landowner shall pay for all work in advance. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1(17-2-1)) 
Sec. 50-57. - Same—State routes. 
Any owner requesting a residential driveway on a state route must first acquire a permit from the state department of transportation. All engineering, permitting, survey or design work shall be the responsibility of the owner. Residential driveways will be placed on state roads to the point of the right-of-way. The homeowner must acquire a septic tank permit from the county health department certifying that the property can support a single-family residence. If a residence is not built or located on the property within two years of the work then the entire cost of the driveway will be charged to the landowner. The county will provide two-ten-ton loads of dirt, six total man hours and three hours of equipment usage. The property owner will be responsible for the purchase of a pipe either from the county or adhering to state department of transportation driveway pipe specifications as determined by the department of transportation. The property owner shall be responsible for any additional material required by the state department of transportation. The road superintendent will provide an estimate of the work to be performed. The landowner shall pay for all work in advance. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1(17-2-2)) 
Sec. 50-58. - Forest management or commercial use. 
Landowners will be responsible the installation of driveways for forestry management or commercial operations and for all cost associated with their installation. Temporary drives shall be the responsibility of the landowner. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1(17-2-3)) 
Sec. 50-59. - Dual use or disputed land use. 
The county board of commissioners reserves the right to make determinations as to the proper category of land usage as it applies to this section of county ordinances. Their decision is final under the home rule provisions of the state constitution. The provision of driveways including manpower and equipment is a courtesy extended to the citizens of the county and does not imply a contract or guarantee of service. 
(Res. of 3-14-2005, § 1(17-2-4)) 
Secs. 50-60—50-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROAD CLOSINGS 

Sec. 50-77. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide a procedure to be used when closing county roads. 
Sec. 50-78. - Procedures. 
The following procedures will be used when closing a county road: 
(1)  Announcement in a meeting of the intent to close a road; 
(2)  Notification of all property owners on the road; 
(3)  Advertisement of notification in the local paper (Wrightsville Headlight) once a week for two consecutive weeks stating that the road is going to be closed and setting a time and place to conduct a public hearing to hear comments; 
(4)  At a meeting of commissioners, production of a certification to close the road along with a sketch of the road to be closed; and 
(5)  Certification that the road is closed and placement of the certification within the minutes. 
(Res. of 3-10-1997) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID AND HAZARDOUS WASTES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 54-19. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the county and to provide an orderly and safe disposal of waste. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2)) 
Sec. 54-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined herein. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlines, or forests. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 for the purpose of removal to scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Scrap tires means all tires, which are no longer suitable for their original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Waste means all discarded substances and material or any such substance, biomedical waste, hazardous waste, or material dumped for commercial purposes with the exception of animal byproducts. The term "waste" includes without imitations, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicles parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial mining, or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste is not hazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § I) 
Sec. 54-21. - Waste disposal generally. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires, and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving litter or waste at any place in this county, including, without limitation, any public or private property in this county or any water in this county unless such litter or waste originates in this county and: 
(1)  The property is designed and permitted by the state and/or by the county board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and waste, and the person is authorized to use such property; and 
(2)  The litter or waste is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; however, any litter or waste placed into such a receptacle or container installed on such property must not be allowed to accumulate for an unreasonable period of time, and in no event shall it be allowed to accumulate of the point of overflowing the container or receptacle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place litter or waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any public highways, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping. 
(2)  In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, stream or creek. 
(3)  In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § II) 
Sec. 54-22. - Scrap tires. 
(a)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or tire retailers shall be subject of rules applicable to solid waste as defined in O.C.G.A. §12-8-40.1 
(b)  No scrap tires shall be disposed of at any county solid waste disposal facility other then a manned convenience center. Scrap tires disposed of at the convenience center are limited to five tires transported by an individual in combination with the person's own solid waste for disposal. 
(c)  The county convenience center is authorized to charge the prevailing rate to offset any cost to the county of disposing of said tires. 
(d)  Any individual disposing of personal use tires at a facility other then authorized in this section shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 per tire. 
(e)  Any scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or tire retailers disposing of scrap tires at a solid waste disposal facility or on any public or private property or any water in this county shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code plus $50.00 per scrap tire. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § III) 
Sec. 54-23. - Transportation of litter and waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling wet or moist litter or waste that leaks, flow freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(b)  Any litter or waste hauled on a moving vehicle in the county shall be covered or secured in such a manner that the litter or waste will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public streets or roadways in the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets, or roadways, in the county without suitable coverings or other restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited on the roads or adjoining areas of the county. 
(d)  Any scrap tire carrier shall have a proper manifest document for a shipment of scrap tires into or through the county; said manifest must contain the final point of destination for said shipment, the origination point and the owner or responsible party for said tires. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § IV) 
Sec. 54-24. - Containers and receptacles. 
(a)  All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is responsibly possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using garbage or litter container or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in or around any such container and receptacle. 
(d)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No dead animals shall be deposited in or around any such container or receptacle. 
(f)  No person shall deposit large noncompactable articles such as stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, mattresses, tires, tree limbs, air conditioning units, or similar items that are not household garbage in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(g)  No one shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in or around any such containers or receptacles. 
(h)  No persons shall place or scatter litter or waste around such containers or receptacles. 
(i)  No one shall scavenge or collect items from, in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § V) 
Sec. 54-25. - Private facilities prohibited. 
(a)  The county declares that for the entirety of the county there is in effect a land use restriction that precludes any private solid waste handling facility, private sanitary landfill, private inert landfill or private construction landfill. Only the board of commissioners of the county for good and solid cause and after two public and advertised meetings may lift such restriction subject only to their collective discretion. 
(b)  In addition, no permit may be issued for the construction or operation of a solid waste landfill facility within a three-mile buffer of any county impaired stream. Any stream, river, waterway or wetland emanating from such water source that exceeds TMDL as defined by the EPA shall be considered an impaired stream. No permit shall be issued for a solid waste facility located within five miles of a municipal water source including stormwater receptacle, discharge or management area. No permit may be issued within three miles of any school or recreation area. No permit may be issued within two miles of the boundaries of any municipality. All rules and regulations sited in the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources Criteria for Siting of Landfills 391-3-4-.05 shall apply unless the county article provides for stricter rules or restrictions. 
(Amd. of Undetermined Date) 
Sec. 54-26. - Contents of permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to permit a solid waste handling facility waste or disposal facility shall prepare and file a permit application with the board. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the states including the EPD/DNR and USEPA. An application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the applicant company, information on its financial capability, and detailed history of all its past activities in the field of biomedical incineration or biomedical waste disposal, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. The applicant shall include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. The applicant shall also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, in which the subsidiary or parent corporation has been involved. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide a history of any claims, charges and/or assessments against the applicant concerning or arising out of the violation of any local, state or federal rule or regulation relating in any way to any biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility, now or formerly owned/operated by the applicant, including any solid waste handling facility or disposal facility now or formerly owned/operated by any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant. 
(3)  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
(4)  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, how it would be handled/stored, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such treatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
(5)  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
(6)  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution names that will be funding construction. 
(7)  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
(8)  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
(9)  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
(10)  A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
(11)  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities and fire departments. 
(12)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated budget for each of these items. 
(13)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operations. 
(14)  A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the anticipated date of closure and the estimated cost of closure, including post closure cost, if applicable. 
(15)  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
(16)  A description of the means or method by which to capture any liquid waste, leachate or runoff from waste feed and ash storage areas, and areas in which trucks, equipment, containers and tools that have come into contact with the waste are decontaminated and processed for disposal. 
(b)  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Ownership. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner (and/or agent) of the subject property. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for plat of survey. 
c.  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants to the property. 
(2)  Description. Location of property tax map parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
(3)  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
a.  Drawn to scale of not less than 160 feet to an inch. 
b.  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
c.  Graphic scale, date, north arrow and legend. 
d.  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
e.  Zoning classification of proposed project and adjacent property. 
f.  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
g.  The total acreage of land in the project. 
h.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmissions lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, watercourses, grand water aquifers, springs and other pertinent features. 
j.  The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
k.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
l.  The location of the 500-year and 100-year floodplain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
(4)  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than ten feet at the same scale as to the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of such survey shall be state. 
(5)  Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. An estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route shall be included. 
(c)  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, onsite storage and/or disposal: 
(1)  Possibility of site flooding; planned special facility design. 
(2)  The nature and predictability of pollution movement, including planned stack height for incinerators, with continuous stack monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable; and planned segregation of incompatible wastes. 
(Amd. of Undetermined Date) 
Sec. 54-27. - Application; fee; bond or letter of credit. 
The board shall require a permit application fee in the amount of $10,000.00 to reimburse the county for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of county staff, including lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall provide the county with a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $2,500,000.00 to insure the post-closure cost or covered by the applicant. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall remain in effect and payable to the county for a period to include the time of operation of the facility and ten years subsequent to the closure of the facility. 
(Amd. of Undetermined Date) 
Sec. 54-28. - Application procedure. 
(a)  In addition to the other information required by this article, the permit applicant shall submit to the board six copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a county permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the board. 
(b)  After the submission of the application, the board shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months and upon making a showing of good cause to the board of commissioners of the county be granted a maximum three-month extension. 
(c)  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the county staff selected by the board. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the county staff may request an additional 60 days from the board, and the applicant, likewise, has the option of requesting the board to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant request for additional information on a completed application. 
(d)  A designee of the board shall compile copies of all reports, applications, and reports by county staff and similar materials. These copies shall be placed in one location with access by the public and availability of copying any portion of any document at a cost to be determined by the board. 
(e)  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the board shall set a time for two public hearings so that the applicant can present its plans and answer questions regarding the same. The county staff shall make reports on the application to the board at such hearing. At the public hearing, the public may comment on the completed application along with the analysis of the county staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Such notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days before the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting in a form prescribed by the board shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on every street of access not less than 14 days before the date specified thereon. The posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in the county newspaper not less than 14 days before the dates specified thereon. 
(f)  Within 45 days after the public hearing, the staff shall make a recommendation to the board at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full board; however, before making a recommendation to the board to accept the proposal or accept it with modifications, the county staff shall make the following determinations: 
(1)  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the health, safety and well-being of the public and the environment. 
(2)  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
(3)  That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability and financial resources to construct, operate and maintain the facility in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and articles. 
(4)  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and articles. 
(5)  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste for which the applicant has listed under section 54-26(a) of this article that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
(6)  That the proposed facility is compatible with an integrated county long range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
(g)  At its next scheduled meeting, the board shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it or grant it with specified conditions. The applicant has the right to appeal any decision by the board of commissioners to the superior court of the county. All expenses of the appeal shall be bourn by the applicant. 
(Amd. of Undetermined Date) 
Sec. 54-29. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  All garbage and litter deposited at convenience centers shall be deposited in an area designated by the attendant on duty. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste at a convenience center in the county. 
(c)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier or signs at the convenience center. 
(d)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any litter or garbage outside the gates or fence of the convenience center or outside or around any receptacle at the center. 
(e)  No person or firm shall deposit or cause to be deposited any waste as defined in this article without said waste being properly weighed and accounted for at the county landfill convenience center. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § VI) 
Sec. 54-30. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any premises in the unincorporated areas of the county shall allow litter or waste to accumulate thereon. No owner or occupant or any such property shall bury litter or waste without prior authorization and permission from the applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to, the environmental protection agency, environmental protection division and/or the state forestry service. Nothing in the provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material, which is otherwise, prohibited by state or federal law. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation, on his or her premises, of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)  The conduct described in this section shall constitute a separate violation of the article each day the garbage or waste material remains on such premises. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § VII) 
Sec. 54-31. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in this magistrate court of the county shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code in addition to the penalties provided in this section. 
(c)  The county may seek civil redress in addition to, and not in limitation of, criminal prosecution for violations of this article. 
(d)  In the sound discretion of the magistrate court, violators of this article may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter thereon deposited by the violator and any other person or entity. 
(e)  In the sound discretion of the magistrate court violators of this article may be directed to pick up and remove any litter from any public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the violator has deposited litter and, in addition, all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(f)  The court may order the publication of the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § VIII) 
Sec. 54-32. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county code enforcement officer or his designee. Any person or person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this article; provided, however that the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way. In addition, upon the complaint of a resident of the county, alleging a violation of this article, the magistrate court of the county shall be authorized to issue summons for hearing on the alleged violation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § IX) 
Sec. 54-33. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § X) 
Sec. 54-34. - Evidence of violations. 
The following acts and omissions shall constitute evidence of violation of this article: 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped, from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article, including but not limited to letter, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name or a person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § XI) 
Sec. 54-35. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings or tree limbs shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. 
(b)  Yard trimmings or tree limbs shall not be placed in or around any garbage or litter container or receptacle 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § XII) 
Sec. 54-36. - Recycling. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the county and to reduce the overall solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of. Therefore, it is the policy of the county board of commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(b)  No person shall deposit garbage or litter of any kind at a collection center or into any county authorized receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recyclable materials. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2002(2), § XIII) 
Sec. 54-37. - [Abandonment or "dumping" of animals at county waste disposal facilities prohibited.] 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to abandon or place animals at, on or within 50 yards of any public property operated by the county as a public waste collection, disposal or dump site ("county dump site"). It shall further be unlawful for anyone to assist with the abandonment of animals by taking part in the unloading of animals at any county dump site or to provide or furnish transportation for said purpose. Each animal abandoned or placed at a county dump site in violation hereof shall constitute a separate violation of this section and shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of Johnson County, Georgia. Any person or entity adjudicated as guilty of a violation of this section shall also be liable for any expenses incurred by the county for the removal or care of abandoned animals or other damages caused by a violation of this section. 
(Res. of 8-13-2018) 
Cross reference— Animals, § 14-1 et seq. 
Secs. 54-38—54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BIOMEDICAL WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-61. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Johnson County Biomedical Waste Law." 
Sec. 54-62. - County policy. 
The board of commissioners of the county in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health safety, and well-being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to revise and update existing laws, and to institute and maintain a comprehensive county-wide program for all biomedical waste handling and disposal facilities which will ensure that the operation of such facilities does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment by reason of location, design, method of operation or other means declares it to be the policy of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-1) 
Sec. 54-63. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Autoclave means any equipment or facility which treats and/or decontaminates biomedical waste by heating with steam and/or pressure but does not include hospitals, physicians' office or other medical service providers who may use autoclaves to decontaminate equipment. 
Biomedical waste shall not include low level radioactive waste and laboratory hazardous waste, the incineration and/or disposal of which is expressly prohibited, except as provided by federal and state law, but means and includes the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste means all recognizable human tissues and body parts, which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy and laboratory procedures. 
(2)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctioning, and other bulk body fluids, which cannot or are not directly discarded into municipal sewer system. 
(3)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures. 
(4)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and their bedding, and other wastes from such animals, which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)  Sharps, which means any discarded article, which may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes and needles attached, and scalped blades. 
(6)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing, gags and vials, and other such quantity that is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations before being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials, which have not been contaminated, that was in contact with infectious agents. 
Biomedical waste disposal facility means any facility to which biomedical waste is transported for transfer, storage, treatment, decontamination or disposal, such facilities include, but are not limited to biomedical waste incinerators, facilities that decontaminate by heating with steam under pressure (autoclave), and transfer stations where biomedical waste is held, stored accumulated or otherwise handled before being transported to another location. 
Biomedical waste incinerator facility means an incinerator or incinerators at a single location that accept biomedical waste for purposes of incineration. 
Board means board of commissioners of the county. 
County staff or staff shall mean any county employees designated by the board as well as any consultants, experts or contractors retained by the board to assist it in its consideration of any matter related to this article. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Incinerator means a device intended or used for the reduction or destruction of biomedical waste by incineration. 
Incinerator ash means the residue remaining after the incineration of biomedical waste. 
Operator means the person having the direct supervision of daily field operations of an incinerator to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the state or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district, partnership association or other entity in this state or any other state. The term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, and special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in the state or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-2) 
Sec. 54-64. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The incineration of biomedical waste is increasingly proposed as a partial alternative to land disposal, however incineration of biomedical waste poses certain hazards to the environment and creates special problems of residue disposal in landfills. In addition, other facilities that handle and dispose of biomedical waste pose certain unique hazards and are of special public concern. Under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39 et seq., the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act, local governments are empowered with the responsibility to regulate biomedical waste incinerator facilities and biomedical waste disposal facilities in such manner as to ensure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Regulate the location, construction, operation, management and closure of biomedical waste incinerator facilities, including autoclaves, dealing with the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of biomedical waste; and 
(2)  Regulate all other storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of biomedical wastes, including autoclaves, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(c)  The board does not intend for this article, or any interpretation of this article, to in any way affect, regulate or restrict any such operations, equipment or practices if they do not involve the processing of biomedical wastes (as the term is defined herein). 
(d)  Furthermore, this article is limited strictly to matters directly involving biomedical waste. This article shall not regulate in any manner any other industry located now or in the future in the county. No industry shall in any way be regulated, affected or restricted by this article other than those specifically involving biomedical wastes in their normal process as described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, §§ 20-3-1-3, 20-3-1-4) 
Sec. 54-65. - Insurance requirements. 
A condition of every county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be the requirement that the holder of said permit maintain environmental impairment liability insurance and general public liability insurance, naming the county as loss payee, in such amounts to be determined by the board or its designee based upon such objective factors as the board deems appropriate to provide for the protection of its citizens and the environment, including but not by way of limitation: the permitted capacity of the facility, the cost of the facility, the environmental safety record and history of the type of equipment installed at the facility, the environmental safety record and history of the manufacturer of the facility, the environmental safety record and history of the owner/operator of the facility, and the estimated cost of closure and post closure. The amount of environmental impairment liability insurance required by the board, or its designee, shall not be less than $10,000,000.00 actual coverage and general public liability insurance required by the board, or its designee, shall not be less than then a minimum of $1,000,000.00 actual coverage. The amount of environmental impairment liability coverage established by the board, or its designee, shall be required to remain in force for five years subsequent to the closure of the facility. Once the amount of actual coverage required by the board, or its designee, is established for the facility, the applicant shall provide the board or its designee, evidence of such insurance coverage before the issuance of the county permit. Annually thereafter at a time required by the board, the holder of said permit shall submit evidence satisfactory to the board that the insurance required by this section is and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-11) 
Sec. 54-66. - Packing and refrigeration. 
(a)  All biomedical waste transported to the biomedical waste incinerator facility or the biomedical waste disposal facility and accepted for incinerator or disposal at such facility shall be packaged in containers which meet or exceed the requirements of 49 CFR 173.196 and 197, or such federal or state regulations which may be adopted in the future setting forth the minimum packaging requirements for biomedical waste. However, at a minimum shall include: 
(1)  Containment of biomedical waste shall be in a manner and location which affords protection from animals, rain and wind, does not provide a breeding place or a food source for insects and rodents, and minimizes exposure to the public. 
(2)  Biomedical waste shall be segregated by separate containment from other waste at the point or origin. 
(3)  Biomedical waste, except for sharps, shall be placed in containers that are impervious to moisture and have strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing or busting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling, or transport. 
(4)  Sharps shall be contained for storage, transportation, treatment and subsequent disposal in leakproof, rigid, puncture resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded to preclude loss of contents. 
(5)  Rigid containers of discarded sharps and all other disposable containers used for containment of biomedical waste shall be red or orange in color or clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or clearly marked with the biohazard. 
(6)  Biomedical waste contained in disposable containers, as prescribed in this section, shall be placed for storage, handling or transport in disposable or reusable pails, cartons, boxes, drums, dumpsters, or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tightfitting cover and be kept clean and in good repair. The containers may be of any color and shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the term "biohazard" on the sides to be readily visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
(7)  Reusable containers used for shipment of biomedical waste shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated each time they are emptied. 
(8)  Reusable pails, drums, dumpsters or bins used for containment of biomedical waste shall not be used for other purposes except after being decontaminated by procedures as described in this section and after the universal biohazard symbol and term "biohazard" are removed. 
(b)  Transfer of biomedical waste to off-site treatment or disposal facilities: 
(1)  Any generator of biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector who is operating under authority of these rules. 
(2)  Biomedical waste shall not be transported in the same vehicle with other solid waste unless the biomedical waste is contained in a separate, fully enclosed leakproof container within the vehicle compartment or unless all of the waste is to be treated as biomedical waste in accordance with the requirements of state rules. 
(3)  Biomedical waste shall be delivered for storage, including intermediate transfer, and treatment only to a facility or location for which there is a valid and appropriate operating permit. 
(4)  Surfaces of transport vehicles that have contacted spilled or leaked biomedical waste shall be decontaminated. 
(5)  Equipment used to transport biomedical waste from the generator to the off-site treatment or disposal facility may not destroy the integrity of the container. 
(6)  Vehicles used for the transport of biomedical waste shall not be used for transportation of food or food products. 
(c)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide refrigerated transportation and storage of biomedical waste that has been or is expected to be held for longer than 72 hours after being discarded at its point of origin. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-12) 
Sec. 54-67. - Control of emissions. 
Emissions from all biomedical waste incinerator facilities, autoclaves and all biomedical waste disposal facilities shall not cause ambient pollution concentrations to exceed levels established by the EPD/DNR or USEPA or levels established by the board or its designee, if such levels, as established, are more stringent than those established by EPD/DNR or USEPA. The board, or its designee, may require as a condition of any initial permit, renewal and/or modification thereof, that ambient pollution concentration not to exceed specific levels as established pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-13) 
Sec. 54-68. - Licensing fee; post closure bond. 
Each biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility which is permitted and operating in the county shall pay to the county board of commissioners a yearly license fee of $5,000.00. Such fee shall be due by January 1 each year. Such funds shall be collected and used as set forth in this article. Each facility must provide to the county upon application for licensure a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit for $2,500,000.00 for post-closure cost. This bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be maintained for the entire period of operation and for ten years after closure to insure post-closure care and maintenance. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-2-1) 
Sec. 54-69. - Surcharges. 
(a)  There is hereby levied upon every biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave and biomedical waste disposal facility, operated by private enterprise and upon the operators thereof, a per ton surcharge or a volume equivalent thereto received by the facility, in addition to any other charges or fees which are now or which may hereafter be imposed by the county for the facility. 
(b)  Said charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  A fee of $5.00 per ton for biomedical waste shall be paid by the operator of any facility to the county on a monthly basis. 
(2)  For autoclaves, the fee shall be $5.00 per ton of equipment/materials processed through the autoclave. 
(c)  No permit, fees, or certificate of compliance shall be required of any incorporated municipality located within the boundaries of the county or the county board of commissioners for the operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility or a biomedical waste disposal facility. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-2-2) 
Sec. 54-70. - Determination of tonnage. 
The tonnage or volume equivalent thereto with respect to which the surcharge is hereby levied shall be such as is finally determined by the EPD/DNR of the board. When the periodic report of tonnage is prepared by the EPD/DNR or other state agency, whether monthly or otherwise, each operator affected hereby shall be advised either by the EPD/DNR or the county of the tonnage or equivalency thereof as determined, and each operator of a biomedical incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility shall remit to the county the amount of the surcharge determined, as provided in section 54-69, within ten days. If the EPD/DNR shall fail to make the determination, it shall be made by the county. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-2-3) 
Sec. 54-71. - Comprehensiveness. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate all biomedical waste incinerator facilities and biomedical waste disposal facilities that may occur in the county, and no such treatment, disposal or handling shall occur except in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-4-1) 
Secs. 54-72—54-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 54-95. - Required 
(a)  Owners and operators of biomedical waste incinerator facilities, autoclaves, or biomedical waste disposal facilities applying for a county permit under this article shall first be permitted as required by the rules and regulations of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources (EPD/DNR) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). Any violation of the conditions of the permit issued by the EPD/DNR and/or USEPA, and any violation of the rules and regulations of the EPD/DNR, USEPA, the state department of transportation, the United States department of transportation, and rules and regulations promulgated under the Occupation Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 USC § 651, shall be a violation of the conditions of the county permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the construction or operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or a biomedical waste disposal facility without first having a permit authorizing such activity issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(c)  No permit may be issued for the construction or operation of a biomedical waste facility within a three-mile buffer of the county impaired stream. Any stream, river, waterway or wetland emanating from such water source that exceeds TMDL as defined by the EPA shall be considered an impaired stream. No permit shall be issued for a biomedical waste facility located within five miles of a municipal water source including stormwater receptacle, discharge or management area. No permit may be issued within three miles of any school or recreation area. No permit may be issued within one mile of the boundaries of any municipality. 
(d)  Any person who began construction or operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or a biomedical waste disposal facility prior to enactment of this article shall be permitted to continue the construction or operation of such facility but the person shall be strictly prohibited from transferring ownership or operation of or expanding its operation in any way, unless the person first makes application to the board in accordance with this article and complies with the applicable provisions hereof. As used in this section, the term "construction" shall mean the active commencement of building a biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility. The term "construction" does not include preliminary activities such as location property, purchasing property, preparing plans, clearing, grading or fencing property. Also, as used in this section, the term "expanding its operation" shall mean any action taken by such person after the effective date of this article to increase its present state permitted volume waste incineration, disposal or handling a [at] the facility. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-5) 
Sec. 54-96. - Notification, modification requirements. 
(a)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to make application to the board for a modification of its existing county permit issued pursuant to this article in the event that any of the following changes or modifications shall occur after the date upon which the county permit is originally issued: 
(1)  Any modification of equipment associated with, or operation of, the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or the biomedical waste disposal facility; 
(2)  Any change of ownership or operator of the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or the biomedical waste disposal facility; 
(3)  Any change in hours of operation of the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or the biomedical waste disposal facility; 
(4)  Any increase in waste throughput at the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or the biomedical waste disposal facility; 
(5)  Any change in the types of biomedical waste being treated or handled at the biomedical incinerator facility, autoclave or the biomedical waste disposal facility; 
(6)  Any change in biomedical waste residue or biomedical waste liquid disposal practices; and/or 
(7)  Any changes in the biomedical waste incinerator facility's ash management plan. 
(b)  The board, or its designee, shall establish a short form application for the purpose of reviewing and facilitating the processing of permit modification requests under his section. 
(c)  The application procedure for permit modification requests shall be the same as required for initial county permit applications under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-6) 
Sec. 54-97. - Application; contents. 
(a)  Any person desiring to permit a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or a biomedical waste disposal facility shall prepare and file a permit application with the board. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the states including the EPD/DNR and the USEPA. An application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the applicant company, information on its financial capability, and detailed history of all its past activities in the field of biomedical incineration or biomedical waste disposal, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. The applicant shall include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. The applicant shall also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, in which the subsidiary or parent corporation has been involved. 
(2)  The identity of the entity from whom the applicant purchased the incinerator, autoclave or other equipment from, its manufacturer, and the contractor responsible for the construction, installation and/or modification of the incinerator, autoclave or other equipment and air pollution control devices, if any. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide a history of any claims, charges and/or assessments against the applicant concerning or arising out of the violation of any local, state or federal rule or regulation relating in any way to any biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility, now or formerly owned/operated by the applicant, including any biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave or biomedical waste facility now or formerly owned/operated by any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant. 
(4)  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
(5)  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, how it would be handled/stored, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such treatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
(6)  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
(7)  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution names that will be funding construction. 
(8)  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
(9)  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
(10)  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
(11)  A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
(12)  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities and fire departments. 
(13)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated budget for each of these items. 
(14)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operations. 
(15)  A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the anticipated date of closure and the estimated cost of closure, including post closure cost, if applicable. 
(16)  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
(17)  A description of the means or method by which to capture any liquid waste, leachate or runoff from waste feed and ash storage areas, and areas in which trucks, equipment, containers and tools that have come into contact with the waste are decontaminated and processed for disposal. 
(b)  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Ownership. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner (and/or agent) of the subject property. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for plat of survey. 
c.  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants to the property. 
(2)  Description. Location of property tax map parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
(3)  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
a.  Drawn to scale of not less than 160 feet to an inch. 
b.  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
c.  Graphic scale, date, north arrow and legend. 
d.  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
e.  Zoning classification of proposed project and adjacent property. 
f.  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
g.  The total acreage of land in the project. 
h.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmissions lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, watercourses, ground water aquifers, springs and other pertinent features. 
j.  The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
k.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
l.  The location of the 100-year and 500-year floodplain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
(4)  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than ten feet at the same scale as to the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of such survey shall be state. 
(5)  Transportation route map . A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. An estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route shall be included. 
(c)  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, onsite storage and/or disposal: 
(1)  Possibility of site flooding; planned special facility design. 
(2)  Potential human exposure to biomedical waste, incinerator ash and wastewater, including planned safety procedures, clothing, instruction and practice for employees; planned oversized or redundant treatment capacity, effluent monitoring and automatic shutdown systems. 
(3)  The nature and predictability of pollution movement, including planned stack height for incinerators, with continuous stack monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable; and planned segregation of incompatible wastes. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-7) 
Sec. 54-98. - Fees. 
The board shall require a permit application fee in the amount of $10,000.00 to reimburse the county for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of county staff, including lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall provide the county with a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $2,500,000.00 to ensure the post-closure cost or covered by the applicant. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall remain in effect and payable to the county for a period to include the time of operation of the facility and ten years subsequent to the closure of the facility. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-8) 
Sec. 54-99. - Procedures. 
(a)  In addition to the other information required by this article, the permit applicant shall submit to the board six copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a county permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required date are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the board. 
(b)  After the submission of the application, the board shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months and upon making a showing of good cause to the board of commissioners of the county be granted a maximum three-month extension. 
(c)  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the county staff selected by the board. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the county staff may request an additional 60 days from the board, and the applicant, likewise, has the option of requesting the board to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant request for additional information on a completed application. 
(d)  A designee of the board shall compile copies of all reports, applications, and reports by county staff and similar materials. These copies shall be placed in one location with access by the public and availability of copying any portion of any document at a cost to be determined by the board. 
(e)  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the board shall set a time for a public hearing so that the applicant can present its plans and answer questions regarding the same. 
(f)  The county staff shall make reports on the application to the board at such hearing. At the public hearing, the public may comment on the completed application along with the analysis of the county staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Such notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days before the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting in a form prescribed by the board shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on every street of access not less than 14 days before the date specified thereon. The posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in the county newspaper not less than 14 days before the dates specified thereon. 
(g)  Within 45 days after the public hearing, the staff shall make a recommendation to the board at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full board; however, before making a recommendation to the board to accept the proposal or accept it with modifications, the county staff shall make the following determinations: 
(1)  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the health, safety and well-being of the public and the environment. 
(2)  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
(3)  That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability and financial resources to construct, operate and maintain the facility in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and articles. 
(4)  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and articles. 
(5)  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste for which the applicant has listed under section 54-67 that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
(6)  That the proposed facility is compatible with an integrated county long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
(7)  That the applicant has a valid contract with the operator or a state licensed landfill for the disposal of any projected ash production of the incineration facility for a three-year period. Such facility shall not be in the county. 
(h)  At its next scheduled meeting, the board shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it or grant it with specified conditions. The applicant has the right to appeal any decision by the board of commissioners to the superior court of the county. All expenses of the appeal shall be bourn by the applicant. 
(i)  A permit shall be valid for 36 months from the date it is granted by the board. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-9) 
Sec. 54-100. - Issuance of permit. 
Should the board grant a biomedical waste incinerator facility permit in accordance with the terms of this article, the permit shall not be issued by the county until the person to whom the permit is granted complies with the provisions of this article relating to the payment of a license fee and post-closure bond. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-15) 
Secs. 54-101—54-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 54-120. - Recordkeeping, reporting requirements; inspections. 
(a)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to perform such monitoring and recording of process and operational parameters as deemed necessary and appropriate by the board. Monitored parameters and required measuring and recording frequencies may include, but not limited to, one or more of the following: 
(1)  Incinerators: 
a.  Frequency and mass of waste charging (continuous). 
b.  Ash generation rate (weekly). 
c.  Primary and secondary chamber temperatures (continuous). 
d.  Flue gas opacity (continuous). 
e.  Auxiliary fuel usage (weekly). 
f.  Primary and secondary combustion air flow rates (weekly). 
g.  Fan motor current (weekly). 
h.  Wet scrubbers (weekly): 
1.  Scrubber liquid header pressure; 
2.  Scrubber liquid flow rate; 
3.  Scrubber liquid pH (daily); 
4.  Scrubber static pressure drop; and 
5.  Demister static pressure drop. 
i.  Dry scrubbers and spray dry absorbers: 
1.  Reagent flow rate (daily); 
2.  Slaker slurry outlet temperature (weekly); 
3.  Solids recycle rate (weekly); 
4.  Nozzle air and slurry pressures (weekly); and 
5.  Wet and dry bulb temperatures (weekly). 
j.  Fabric filters: 
1.  Bag failure records (continuous); 
2.  Static pressure drop (weekly); and 
3.  Baghouse inlet and outlet temperatures (weekly). 
k.  Flue gas concentrations: 
1.  Acid gases; 
2.  CO; 
3.  O2, CO2; and 
4.  Opacity. 
(2)  Autoclaves: 
a.  A recording thermometer shall be used during each complete cycle to ensure the attainment of a temperature of 121 degrees Centigrade (250 degrees Fahrenheit) for one-half hour or longer in order to achieve decontamination of the entire load. 
b.  Monitoring of the steam sterilization process shall be required in order to confirm the attainment of decontamination. 
c.  Monitoring may be conducted using biological indicators or other methods as approved by the board. Indicators used to ensure the attainment of the proper temperature during steam sterilization shall be placed at the point of the load where the rate of thermal penetration is at a minimum. 
(b)  The holder of a county incinerator permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to perform a TCLP (Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure, Method 1311, EPA Publication SW.846) analysis on the ash based upon a schedule to be determined by the board or its designee, which may include the taking of daily grab samples, the analysis of composite grab samples, the analysis of composite grab samples at such frequency as determined by the board or its designee. 
(c)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article may be required by the board of its designee to engage in performance testing of the biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility at one or more of the following times: the initial startup of a new facility, the startup of an existing facility after significant modification or operational changes, prior to the issuance of an initial county permit, and/or the renewal of an existing county permit. Such testing may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: TCLP testing of ash, combustibility testing of ash, putrescility testing of ash, stack testing for acid gases, metals, CO, VOC's, dioxins/furans, PM, etc. biologic tracer test, temperature testing, and thermal penetration testing. 
(d)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide the board or its designee, the county health department, environmental section, copies of all semi-annual reports submitted to the environmental protection division of the state (EPD), all notices of violation from EPD and responses thereto, EPD reports of no-notice site inspections, and county shall be promptly notified of any occurrence of a serious nature likely to cause public concern, including but not limited to, fire, explosion, or extensive uncontrolled emissions. 
(e)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide to the board or its designee, on an annual basis, the resumes of supervisory and management personnel responsible for the supervision and management of the incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility, and all records of training and certification relating to any employee of the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
(f)  The holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to present an ash management plan, or decontaminated waste disposal plan in the case of autoclaves, to the board or its designee at the time that the holder of a county permit first makes application for an initial permit pursuant to this article, and annually thereafter following the issuance of the county permit for the operation of the incineration facility. Such plan shall include a description of the estimated quantity of ash or decontaminated biomedical waste to be disposed of during the upcoming year, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all landfills where such ash or decontaminated biomedical waste will be disposed. 
(g)  The board or its designee shall have the right to perform inspections of the biomedical waste incinerator facility or biomedical waste disposal facility during normal operating hours without prior notice to the owner/operator of such facility. The board's or its designee's right to perform inspections under this subsection shall include the authority to perform independent testing on any aspect of the performance of the biomedical waste incinerator facility or biomedical waste disposal facility for purposes of monitoring the facility's compliance with this article. The board of its designee shall have the authority to require that the holder of a county permit issued pursuant to the article be required to install auxiliary sampling ports as a condition of its permit for the purpose of supporting inspections and independent testing. 
(h)  All cost for testing, monitoring, inspections, generation of reports or any other general or specific requirement listed or contemplated by this section shall be the responsibility of the permit holder. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-10) 
Sec. 54-121. - Certification of operator. 
No person shall operate a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste facility unless such individual who operates or maintains such facility obtains a certificate of training in medical waste incinerators issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers within nine months of the commencement of the training program. Copies of the training certificates for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the board and shall be available for inspection at the facility along with the permit to operate. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-1-14) 
Sec. 54-122. - Appropriations. 
Upon receipt of the surcharge from a biomedical incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility, the finance director of the county shall cause the same to be deposited into a separate account and the funds so collected and deposited are hereby appropriated to offset the impact of the facility, public education efforts for waste management, the cost of biomedical waste management, and the administration of local or regional solid/biomedical waste management plans as determined from time to time by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-2-4) 
Sec. 54-123. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article where such violation occurs within the unincorporated area of the county, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  In addition, the court may order the person to repair or restore property damage, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation. 
(c)  In addition, the expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-3-1) 
Sec. 54-124. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners and/or the county sheriff's office. The board or its designee shall be authorized to issue citations for violations. Citations for violations herein occurring within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be issued for appearance and disposition in the magistrate court of the county, which shall have jurisdiction over all such cases. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-3-2) 
Sec. 54-125. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court or competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer, in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board may cause written notice to be given, or incorporated into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event, the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type or waste as defined in this section, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the section on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for herein, the board shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004, § 20-3-3-3) 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 58-19. - Freeport exemption. 
The county board of commissioners of roads and revenues desires to provide a tax exemption incentive in order to attract industry to the county and to encourage industry to remain in the county. Therefore, the freeport exemption is increased to 100 percent effective January 1, 1995. 
(Res. of 6-13-1994) 
Chapter 66 - WATER AND SEWER 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-19. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as, referred to, and may be cited as "The On-Site Sewage Management, and Permit Law of Johnson County." 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 66-20. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent and policy of the county board of commissioners to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the county and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the county; to facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters that is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the county; and to require permits for new development or location within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 66-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, codified as 40 CFR section 261, and as amended. 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership that is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
Perennial river/stream means a river/stream or section of a river/stream that normally flows continuously throughout the whole year. 
Protected river corridor means all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground, bordering a river or a stream that serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or resubdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Wetlands mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 3) 
Sec. 66-22. - Minimum lot size. 
(a)  All lots intended for residential or other use within the county shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the state department of human resources according to the "Rules of Department of Human Resources Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems Manual for On-site Sewage Management," and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in the table MT-1 if on-site sewage management is utilized; and/or this article, whichever is stricter. 
(b)  For single-family dwellings including, but not limited to, manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, and like structures, and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks, minimum lot size requirements for lots utilizing on-site management systems are as follows. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local zoning, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. The minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the state department of human resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in sections A-F of the DHR Manual. 
(c)  Minimum (min) lot sizes, minimum lot widths and maximum (max) allowable sewage flow for the type of water supply system. 
TABLE MT-1. TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

 
(d)  Minimum lot sizing requirements for those lots utilizing on-site sewage management systems are as stated Table MT-1 for multifamily residential dwellings, all other nonsingle-family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile home parks. These minimum lot size requirements may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in sections A-F of the DHR Manual. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.2, app. 1) 
Sec. 66-23. - Other minimum lot sizes. 
(a)  Minimum lot size requirements for any mobile home utilizing an on-site management system (septic tank) is one acre, with a minimum lot width of 150 feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot size requirement within a protected river corridor (Oconee River) is two acres, provided the septic tank drain field is located outside a 100-foot buffer area. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, app. 1) 
Secs. 66-24—66-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS AND PROVISIONS 

Sec. 66-48. - Permit required—Erection, construction of buildings, mobile homes, structures, land. 
No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of county board of commissioners shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the county board of commissioners. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the county. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.1) 
Sec. 66-49. - Same—Sewage management system construction. 
No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the county until site approval and an on-site sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.3) 
Sec. 66-50. - Same—Coordination. 
The required permit under this article shall not be issued until the county health department issues an on-site site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this article, including the "Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." If the county health department is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, the permit or letter under this section shall suffice as the permit required under section 66-48. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.4) 
Sec. 66-51. - Regulations, requirements. 
The regulations and requirements set by this article shall be the minimum requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.5) 
Sec. 66-52. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
All developments, structures, and uses within the county shall also meet the requirements of all other local, federal and state regulations in effect, including but not limited to, the department of transportation regulations, the state fire marshal regulations, The state's uniform construction codes, and the state department of natural resources and the state environmental protection division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute certification of compliance with such codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.6) 
Sec. 66-53. - Map interpretation. 
If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this article because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the county board of commissioners, or the county health department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this article shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in section 66-54. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.7) 
Sec. 66-54. - Map appeal. 
Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the county board of commissioners or the county health department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division, and the county board of commissioners, or and the county health department if the county health department is delegated responsibility for administering this article. Any costs for submission of evidence to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.8) 
Sec. 66-55. - Coordination with zoning and other regulation. 
This article shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the county board of commissioners, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this article shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirement to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.9) 
Sec. 66-56. - Fees. 
Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this article shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the county board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 4.10) 
Sec. 66-57. - Delegation of article administration. 
The county board of commissioners because of the need for coordination hereby charges the county health department with responsibility for administering this article and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2000, § 5) 
Secs. 66-58—66-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS AND MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 66-88. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all subdivisions and all mobile home parks. 
Sec. 66-89. - Predevelopment review. 
It is required that developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to developmental improvements. Rejection or tentative approval may be obtained by submitting a boundary plat including: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  A topographic map; and 
(3)  Preliminary soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
Sec. 66-90. - Proposal and plans required. 
The following information is required for subdivision and mobile home park proposals: 
(1)  A boundary plat drawn to a reasonable scale, which includes: 
a.  A vicinity map; 
b.  Proposed lots and streets including lot identification, dimensions, building lines and square footage of lots; 
c.  A topographic map depicted in two foot contour intervals, provided, however, that lesser contour intervals may be approved by the county board of health if the slope is sufficiently steep; 
d.  A soil map and soil descriptions based on a high intensity soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems; 
e.  The location of all present and proposed wells, water systems, watercourses, floodplains, sewage systems, structures, rights-of-way, utilities, stormwater drainage systems and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property; and 
f.  The name, registration number and seal of the preparing professional surveyor or engineer. 
(2)  A completed subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department. 
(3)  A copy of the following documents issued by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources: 
a.  The land disturbance activity permit; 
b.  The letters of approval to begin construction of a public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized; and 
c.  The approved stormwater pollution prevention plan, where applicable. 
Sec. 66-91. - Approval required. 
No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision or mobile home park until written approval of plans for water supply and sewage disposal has been obtained from the county board of health. This approval constitutes general acceptance of all lots not excluded for development of on-site sewage management systems. (Excluded lots may receive further consideration based on additional information.) 
Sec. 66-92. - Limits on use. 
Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks utilizing on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted: 
(1)  When a public or community sewage system is available within 500 feet off the subdivision or mobile home park. 
(2)  When soil maps, descriptions, and reports compiled by a registered soil classifier indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development of on-site sewage management systems. 
(3)  Prior to receipt of a letter from the environmental protection division approving the plans to construct the public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized. 
Sec. 66-93. - Construction permits. 
Construction permits for on-site sewage management systems shall be issued in accordance with section 290-5-26-.03(2)(a) of the Rules for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2003, § 13-1-8-1) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2002 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions adopted since the 2002 Code which are included herein. This table contains some ordinances and resolutions which precede the 2002 Code, but which were never included therein for various reasons. Ordinances and resolutions adopted since the 2002 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 