Chapter 10 - BUDGET[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 10-1. - Fiscal year.     The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. (Code 1992, § 4-201) State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 10-2. - Procedures for adoption of budget.     The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended, and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows: (1)  Introduction and approval. The municipal budget shall be introduced in writing by the city clerk and initially approved no later than November 30 of the fiscal year. Upon initial approval by the city council, the city council shall fix the time and place for the holding of a public hearing. (2)  Public hearing advertisement. The municipal budget shall be advertised on the day that the proposed budget is submitted to the city council for consideration. The advertisement shall contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time, and the place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten days prior to the date fixed therefor in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the municipality. The statement shall be a prominently displayed advertisement or news article and shall not be placed in that section of the newspaper where legal notices appear. A copy of the budget shall also be made available, upon request, to the news media. (3)  Public hearing. a.  The municipal budget shall not be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. Such hearing shall be held not less than 21 days after the initial approval of the budget at the time and place specified in the advertisement thereof, and may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. b.  The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full, or it may be read only by its title if at least one week prior to the date of the hearing a complete copy of the budget shall have been posted in the city hall and shall have been made available to each person requesting the same during the previous week and during the public hearing. (4)  Amendments. a.  The city council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing, except that no proposed amendment shall be effective without such a hearing if it shall: 1.  Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of appropriations as stated in the initially approved budget; 2.  Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than ten percent; or 3.  Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent. b.  Notice of a hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. Any such amendment must be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and must be read in full at the hearing and before adoption. (5)  Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted not later than January 30 of the fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by taxation for the purposes of the municipality. (Code 1992, § 4-202) State Law reference— Budget preparation and hearings, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. 
Sec. 10-3. - Budget message.     When introduced to the city council for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, together with the reasons for such change; summarize the city's debt position; and include such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. (Code 1992, § 4-203) 
Sec. 10-4. - Form and content of budget.     The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: (1)  Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each city department or office, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit; (2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; (3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; (4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; (5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation, and maintenance expenses; and (6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. (Code 1992, § 4-204) 
Sec. 10-5. - Publication of financial statement.     Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures, which fairly represents the financial condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. (Code 1992, § 4-209) 
Secs. 10-6—10-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CAPITAL PROGRAM 
Sec. 10-29. - Submission; components.     A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: (1)  A clear general summary of its contents; (2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; (3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and (4)  The estimated annual cost of operation and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. (Code 1992, § 4-205) 
Secs. 10-30—10-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPROPRIATIONS 
Sec. 10-47. - Transfer.     The mayor may, at any time during the fiscal year, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the city council may, by ordinance, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. (Code 1992, § 4-206) 
Sec. 10-48. - Emergency.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. (Code 1992, § 4-207) 
Sec. 10-49. - Lapse.     Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. (Code 1992, § 4-208) 
Chapter 11 - RESERVED 
Chapter 12 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HIGH-EFFICIENCY PLUMBING FIXTURES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Commercial means any type of building other than residential.     Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.     Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. (b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 ("High-efficiency plumbing fixtures") shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. (Code 1992, § 34-101) 
Sec. 12-20. - Construction.     No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state minimum plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly-constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovations of existing buildings, except as noted in section 12-21. The standards are as follows: (1)  A water closet or toilet that: a.  Is a dual-flush water closet that meets the following standards: 1.  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 2.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: (i)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and (ii)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 3.  Is listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or b.  Is a single-flush water closet, including gravity, pressure-assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 1.  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 2.  The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 3.  The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; (2)  A showerhead that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; (3)  A urinal and associated flush valve that: a.  Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; b.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; c.  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense TM specifications for flushing urinals; and d.  Where non-water urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Non-water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where non-water urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where non-water urinals are installed, a minimum of one water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; (4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense TM High Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and (5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than two gallons of water per minute. (Code 1992, § 34-102) 
Sec. 12-21. - Exemptions.     New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 12-20 when: (1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; (2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; (3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or (4)  Units to be installed are: a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or c.  Toilets for juveniles. The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the county building inspector. A fee to be established by the county shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. (Code 1992, § 34-105) 
Sec. 12-22. - Enforcement; penalty. (a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the county building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the county building inspector. (b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished according to the penalties described in the general provisions chapter of this Code. (Code 1992, § 34-106) 
Secs. 12-23—12-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE MINIMUM STANDARD CODES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i); enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-52. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Department means the state department of community affairs. 
Sec. 12-53. - State minimum standard codes.     Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, the latest editions of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended by the department of community affairs: (1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (3)  Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 Georgia amendments. (4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. (7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. (8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with 2011 and 2012 Georgia supplements and amendments. (9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with 2015 Georgia amendments. (Code 1992, § 36-101; Ord. of 10-08-2018(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-54. - Conflicts. (a)  If any of the publications listed herein are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed herein are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., the state minimum code shall control. (b)  A copy of each of the publications listed herein, as adopted by the state, is filed in the city clerk's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. (Code 1992, § 36-101) 
Chapter 13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 
Sec. 14-1. - Short title.     This chapter shall be known as the "Private and Church Cemetery Ordinance of Arcade, Georgia." (Code 1992, § 37-101; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-101) 
Sec. 14-2. - Site plan.     The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a public road or street. Said site plan shall be filed with the city clerk with a valid survey outlining all individual cemetery plots and appropriate setbacks as defined in section 14-4. The persons or entity engaged in such activity shall then come before the city council and, if approved, the applicant shall be issued a permit for such activity contained herein. (Code 1992, § 37-102; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-102) 
Sec. 14-3. - Site size.     Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than ten acres, except churches which shall have at least three acres. (Code 1992, § 37-103; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-103) 
Sec. 14-4. - Setbacks.     All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. (Code 1992, § 37-104; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-104) 
Sec. 14-5. - Maintenance.     The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. (Code 1992, § 37-105; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-105) 
Sec. 14-6. - Inspection.     The city council or its agents shall periodically inspect the sites of cemeteries to verify that the activities contained herein are being conducted in accordance with this chapter. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in this activity has failed to comply with the adopted plan, a written notice shall be served upon that person or entity. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state a time within which such measures must be completed. If a person or entity engaged in such activities fails to comply within the time specified, the person or entity shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. (Code 1992, § 37-106; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-106) 
Sec. 14-7. - Entry.     No person or entity shall refuse entry or access to any authorized city representative or agent who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (Code 1992, § 37-107; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-107) 
Sec. 14-8. - Civil penalties.     Any person or entity violating any provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in jail, or both fine and jail, or work alternative. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1992, § 37-108; Ord. of 5-11-1998, § 37-108) 
Chapter 15 - RESERVED 
Chapter 16 - COURTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— City courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq.; bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 16-1. - Creation of municipal court.     It is hereby established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Arcade, Georgia, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by the laws of the state, to subpoena witnesses, to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city, including traffic cases which, under the laws of the state, are now and hereinafter placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. The presiding officer of such court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. The court shall be convened at the city hall or such other place within the city as designated by the judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the city council. (Code 1992, § 5-101) 
Sec. 16-2. - Appointment and qualifications of judge. (a)  The judge of the municipal court shall be a member of the Georgia Bar, shall reside in the judicial district in which the court is located, shall be at least 21 years of age, and shall have practiced law either as an attorney or as a judge, for at least five years preceding. The city council shall provide for the compensation for his appointment. (b)  The city council shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve from time to time in the municipal judge's absence. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications set forth in subsection (a) of this section for the judge of the municipal court and have the same powers granted to the judge of the municipal court. (Code 1992, § 5-102) 
Sec. 16-3. - Sessions of court. (a)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined by the judge; provided that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. (b)  The municipal court may hold special sessions of court when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons before the next regularly-scheduled session of court. (Code 1992, § 5-103) 
Sec. 16-4. - Clerk of court. (a)  The city administrator shall be clerk of court and shall be appointed or removed by the city council. (b)  The clerk of court shall: (1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person to whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom it was delivered; (2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and (3)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the judge. (Code 1992, § 5-104) 
Sec. 16-5. - Practice. (a)  The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence; then he shall be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first whether ready for trial and, if not ready, shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the superior court, as far as applicable to the case on trial. (b)  Any person who is charged with an offense against any of the provisions of this Code, or any city ordinances, shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him; and shall have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as far as they are applicable to examining courts, shall be applicable to cases before the municipal court. The party accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. No one shall be condemned, fined, or punished without a chance of being heard in his defense. (Code 1992, § 5-106) 
Sec. 16-6. - Form and execution of summons.     It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation of the Code or city ordinances, whether the party is confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring such offender to appear in municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense, and the time and place of trial, bear test in the name of the judge of the municipal court, be signed officially by the clerk of court, and directed to the police chief or any city police officer to be executed, which police officer shall execute the same by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. (Code 1992, § 5-107) 
Sec. 16-7. - Witness—Subpoena.     Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the court to establish any fact, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bearing test in the name of the judge of municipal court, which subpoena shall be served as other summons by any police officer. (Code 1992, § 5-108) 
Sec. 16-8. - Same—Defaulting.     If any person so summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attend a trial, or render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgment of the court, the defaulting witness shall be liable for a fine to be determined by the city council from time to time and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the witness's absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any police officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. (Code 1992, § 5-109) 
Sec. 16-9. - Continuances.     Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the court under the rules governing the superior courts of the state. (Code 1992, § 5-110) 
Sec. 16-10. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant.     Any party against whom any compliant is lodged or information given may file a plea of guilty under such regulations and upon terms as the court may prescribe and, if such party cannot attend the trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case as if the party were personally present, if the defendant consents thereto. (Code 1992, § 5-112) 
Sec. 16-11. - Persons implicated to be tried.     If, on the trial of any cause before the municipal court, it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a provision of this Code or any city ordinance, he may then and there be tried if present, unless the case is continued for legal cause. (Code 1992, § 5-113) 
Sec. 16-12. - Docket.     A docket shall be kept in the office of the clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction and, at the trial of all cases in the municipal court, the municipal court judge shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment inflicted and the date; and the clerk of the court shall enter, under the municipal court judge's sentence, the final disposition of the case (i.e., whether the fine, if any, was collected and the date of such collection, and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of the court). (Code 1992, § 5-115) 
Sec. 16-13. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations.     Whenever a corporation shall violate any provision of this Code or any city ordinance, a warrant shall be issued against such corporation for violating such provisions, and the clerk of the court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served by the police chief or any city police officer upon any officer of the corporation; and the police officer serving such copy shall at the time notify such person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial, and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made, and return the same to the municipal court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order which other cases against individuals for violation of city ordinances are tried. If, on the trial, the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and trial shall proceed as though the defendant has appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the presiding officer, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of the court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the police chief as tax executions in favor of the city are now allowed by law to be levied and collected. (Code 1992, § 5-116) 
Sec. 16-14. - Appearance bond—Security requirement; maximum amount.     The police chief, a member of the police department, the municipal court judge, the sheriff of the county, or his deputy may take bond, with security or without security, at his discretion in a sum not exceeding $1,000.00 for the appearance of any party accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or any city ordinance, or any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by his trial before the municipal court, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. (Code 1992, § 5-117) 
Sec. 16-15. - Same—Failure or refusal to give, subsequent confinement or guard.     If either party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required of them, or either of them, such person so failing or refusing may be confined to the jail of the county, or other place in the county as may be directed by the municipal court judge, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. (Code 1992, § 5-118) 
Sec. 16-16. - Same—Forfeiture for failure to appear; service of rule.     All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in the special bail. Upon the failure of any principal to appear in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any city ordinance, or of any offense over which municipal court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the presiding officer shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on a day therein named not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why he should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and security by any officer or member of the police force at least five days before the time therein set for hearing the same. (Code 1992, § 5-119) 
Sec. 16-17. - Same—Judgment.     If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge shall proceed to enter judgment against such principal and sureties for the amount of the bond forfeited as provided herein, and the city clerk shall issue execution for the amount of such judgment and place the same in the hands of the police chief, who shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale as in case of tax executions. (Code 1992, § 5-120) 
Sec. 16-18. - Same—Surrender of principal.     Any surety upon a bail bond of any person charged with a violation of a provision of this Code or a city ordinance, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, may surrender his principal at any time to the police chief, who shall confine such principal, until discharged by order of the judge of the municipal court, or other proper officer, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal as aforesaid shall discharge the surety of all further liability upon such bond, provided that delivery shall be before any judgment of forfeiture upon the bond shall have been entered. (Code 1992, § 5-121) 
Sec. 16-19. - Professional bondsman. (a)  No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he has deposited with the city clerk the sum of $5,000.00 to guarantee the payment of any bond, if forfeited, which he may sign. In the event the defendant named in any bond signed by a professional bondsman fails to appear according to the conditions of the bond, and the bond is forfeited, the city clerk shall deduct the amount of the bond from the deposit made as herein required and pay the same into the city treasury. If at any time the balance on deposit diminishes to $2,500.00 or less, the bondsman shall not be accepted as surety on a bail bond again until he has deposited with the city clerk an amount sufficient to restore the deposit to the original required amount. (b)  Qualifications. Professional bondsmen shall meet the following qualifications: (1)  Each bondsman shall provide the city with a current period financial statement, including a documented balance sheet. (2)  Each bondsman shall provide the city with a copy of his business license. (3)  Each bondsman shall provide a written proposal outlining the steps he takes as a surety to identify and locate potential defendants who fail to appear on the original court date. (4)  Each bondsman shall provide a written history of his experience in the bonding business, including a statement listing the principals, officers, directors, and shareholders of his corporation. (5)  Each bondsman shall update this information annually. (6)  Each bondsman shall submit to and must pass a full investigation by the police chief, including a state and federal criminal history check. Any information which demonstrates any involvement in criminal activity shall be grounds for disqualification of the applicant. (Ord. of 11-10-2008, § 5-122) 
Chapter 17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; officers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; powers enumerated, O.C.G.A. § 36-24-2. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-1. - Adoption of state rules and regulations.     The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Election Code, are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in the city. (Code 1992, § 2-101) 
Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 
Sec. 18-21. - Registrars and deputy registrars. (a)  Appointment. The city administrator or his designee shall act as registrar, whose duty it is to register qualified city voters. The registrar shall administer the oath required of voters and enter on the official voting list the name and address of the voter, provided all qualifications are met. (b)  Deputy registrars. The city council shall appoint such deputy registrars as are necessary to assist the registrar in conducting an election. Compensation shall be as the city council deems appropriate. (c)  Qualifications. Registrars and deputy registrars shall be electors of the municipality and shall be able to read, write, and speak the English language. Such appointees, while serving as registrars or deputy registrars or within a period of six months after so serving, shall not be eligible for any nomination or office to be voted for at a primary or election. (d)  Oath. Prior to entering upon his duties, each registrar and deputy registrar shall swear to faithfully perform his duties, such oath to be administered by an officer authorized by law to administer the oath. (e)  Term of office. Persons appointed to the position of registrar or deputy registrar shall serve for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as hereinafter provided. (f)  Powers. The registrars and deputy registrars shall exercise those powers and duties and shall be subject to such regulations as are set forth under state law. (g)  Resignation or removal. Any registrar or deputy registrar shall have the right to resign at any time by submitting a resignation to the city council. The city council shall have the right at any time to remove one or more of such registrars for cause after notice and hearing. If any registrar resigns or is removed for cause, his duties and authority as such shall terminate instantly. In the event of death, resignation, or removal of a registrar or deputy registrar, the city council shall appoint a successor who shall serve out the unexpired term. Each such appointment shall be entered on the minutes of the city council meeting to which the appointment is made. (Code 1992, § 2-201) State Law reference— Registrar appointments, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212; election officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214. 
Sec. 18-22. - Registration lists and records.     The city shall maintain its own registration system. The form of the registration cards shall conform to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-217. The completed registration cards and other papers of the registrars shall be kept in the main office of the board of registrars in the city hall and shall be open to public inspection during usual business hours. (Code 1992, § 2-203) 
Sec. 18-23. - Challenge of registration list.     Any elector of the municipality shall have the right to challenge the registration of any person whose name appears on the registration list in the manner set forth below. (1)  Appeal to registrar. Any challenge of a person's right to register shall be made in the first instance to the registrar, who shall, upon hearing the evidence, decide whether to affirm or reverse the original decision. (2)  Appeal to city council. Any person asserting a challenge under this section, or any person whose name was omitted from the registration list by the registrar, shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the registrar to the city council. If the city council should decide, after hearing the evidence of such person and that of the registrar, that the registrar erred in his decision, such body shall direct the registrar to correct the error. (Code 1992, § 2-204) 
Sec. 18-24. - Permanency of registration.     Registration of an elector will remain permanent if the elector votes in at least one election every three years. If such person does not vote in at least one general or special election or primary in a three-year period and does not specially request continuation of his registration, then the elector's name will be removed from the registration list, and he shall be required to re-register in the manner provided for original registration. (Code 1992, § 2-205) 
Sec. 18-25. - Absentee registration.     Municipalities that elect to maintain their own registration lists shall provide for absentee registration pursuant state law. (Code 1992, § 2-206) 
Sec. 18-26. - Preparation and disposition of voting lists.     As soon as possible after the registration deadline has passed, the registrar shall compile voter lists and make them available at all polling places and file an official permanent list in the city hall. (Code 1992, § 2-207) 
Sec. 18-27. - Ballots.     The registrar shall prepare and distribute the ballots. (Code 1992, § 2-208) 
Secs. 18-28—18-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES 
Sec. 18-58. - Campaign financing disclosure.     All candidates for municipal public office shall keep all such records and file such reports as are required by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-30 et seq. (Code 1992, § 2-303) State Law reference— Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-30 et seq. 
Secs. 18-59—18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING 
Sec. 18-90. - Polling places.     The polling place within the city shall be the city hall, or at such other locations as shall be designated by ordinance. (Code 1992, § 2-403) State Law reference— Polling places to be selected by governing authority of municipality, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265. 
Sec. 18-91. - Vote required for election.     Candidates for nomination for any public municipal office in any primary, and candidates for any public municipal office in any election, shall be nominated or elected by a plurality of the votes cast to fill such nomination or public office. (Code 1992, § 2-407) State Law reference— Vote requirements, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-501. 
Chapter 19 - RESERVED 