Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 
Sec. 20-19. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape.     Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products, or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; (3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; (4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; (5)  Watering personal food gardens; (6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (8)  Hand-watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; (11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or (13)  Hydroseeding. (Ord. No. 40, § 40-1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 20-20. - Enforcement. (a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. (b)  The city shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. (c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. (Ord. No. 40, § 40-2, 2-14-2011) 
Secs. 20-21—20-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 02-12-2018(1) , adopted Feb. 12, 2018, repealed Ch. 20, Art. III, §§ 20-44—20-51, which pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from the Code of 1992, § 35-101—35-108. 
Chapter 21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; adoption and enforcement of fire safety standards by certain counties, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the fire prevention code adopted in section 22-25, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Chief of the bureau of fire prevention means the chief of the city fire department, and whenever the term "bureau of fire prevention" is used in such code, it shall be held to mean the city fire department.     Corporation counsel means the city attorney. (Code 1992, § 10-102) 
Sec. 22-2. - Enforcement.     The fire prevention code adopted in section 22-25 shall be enforced by the fire chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters of the fire department as are required to effectuate the provisions of said code. (Code 1992, § 10-103) 
Sec. 22-3. - Power to make modifications.     The chief of the fire department shall be authorized to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee of any property, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed and the public safety secured. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be forwarded to the applicant. (Code 1992, § 10-104) 
Sec. 22-4. - Penalties.     Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be punished according to the penalties described in the General Provisions chapter of this Code. (Code 1992, § 10-105) 
Secs. 22-5—22-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Sec. 22-25. - Adoption of National Fire Prevention Code.     There is hereby adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code as enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i), except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. (Code 1992, § 10-101) 
Chapter 23 - RESERVED 
Chapter 24 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 24-1. - Authorization.     Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 24-2. - Findings of fact. (a)  The city flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated or floodproofed, or are otherwise unprotected from flood damages; and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 24-3. - Statement of purpose.     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 24-4. - Objectives.     The objectives of this chapter are: (1)  To protect human life and health; (2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; (4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; (5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and (7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 24-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies.     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 24-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. (a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. (b)  For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county, are hereby adopted by reference. (c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (d)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps, and other supporting data is located in the county GIS department. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 24-7. - Establishment of development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 24-8. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 24-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 24-10. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1)  Considered as minimum requirements; (2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and (3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 24-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 24-12. - Penalties for violation.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 24-13. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction.     Appeal means a request for a review of the planning and zoning commission's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 24-6.     Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building. See Structure.     Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. The term "critical facility" includes: (1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; (2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.     Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before December 17, 2010 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community).     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 17, 2010.     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.     Historic structure means any structure that is; (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after December 17, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after December 17, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after December 17, 2010.     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. (1)  The market value of the structure should be: a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. (2)  For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or b.  Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 6) 
Secs. 24-14—24-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 24-45. - Designation of flood damage provision administrator.     The city is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 24-46. - Permit procedures. (a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the city administrator (or his designee) on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. (b)  Specifically, the following information is required: (1)  Application stage. a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 24-69(2); d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. (2)  Construction stage. a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the city administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. b.  Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. c.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. d.  The city administrator or his designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 24-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the city administrator.     Duties of the city administrator or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. (2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, and require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. (3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. (4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 24-6, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. (5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 24-46(b). (6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 24-46(b). (7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 24-46(b)(1)c and section 24-69(2) or 24-71(2). (8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. (9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. (12)  Maintain in his office all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter and keep such records open for public inspection. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 24-48—24-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sec. 24-68. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; (5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; (7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; (8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; (9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 24-69. - Specific standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 24-68(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. (2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and in section 24-47(6). (3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 1.  Individual lots or parcels; 2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood; must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see section 24-68(6)). d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 3.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a through c of this section. (4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-6 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 24-70. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones).     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 24-6, then the city administrator or his designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. (2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream, or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 24-68(4). a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. b.  The city administrator or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 24-71. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (AE zones) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways.     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-6, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (AE zones), the following provisions apply: (1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. (2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 24-69. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 24-72. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).     Areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-6 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 24-68(4). The city administrator or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and as required in section 24-46(b)(1)c and (b)(2). (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 24-73. - Standards for subdivisions. (a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. (b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. (c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivisions and all other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final letter of map revision (LOMR). (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 24-74. - Standards for critical facilities. (a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 24-75—24-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE 
Sec. 24-92. - Procedures. (a)  The planning and zoning commission, as established by the city council, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. (b)  The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city council in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. (d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this section and other sections of this article. (h)  Conditions for variances: (1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (4)  The city administrator or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. of 1-14-2013, art. 5) 
Chapter 25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - FRANCHISES 
Sec. 26-1. - Private utility providers.     No person, business entity or other organization shall engage in the business of providing telephone, cable television, electricity, natural gas, or waste disposal/trash services within the city limits without having first applied for and receiving a franchise under this chapter and a business license to engage in such business. 
Sec. 26-2. - Application; authorization; private contractors. (a)  Upon application being filed on forms prepared and approved by the city council and execution of a franchise agreement with the city, firms may be franchised for operation within the city. Such franchised firm shall be approved and authorized by the city council to provide such services as provided for in the franchise agreement. Franchises shall be granted for a period of one year. The city may award a new franchise to any applicant at any time; however, any new franchise must not have an effective date before the expiration of an existing franchise covering that territory unless the new franchise is a renewal or unless the existing franchise is terminated as provided in this section. Franchises shall be granted or disapproved after investigation into the financial status of applicants; the ability of the applicant to serve the franchised area; the needs of the area; and the ability of the applicant to provide a service as would be in the best interests and serve the general welfare of the citizens of the area. (b)  No franchise hereunder may be delegated, assigned or otherwise transferred to any person or entity by the existing franchise without the express written permission and approval from the city council. (c)  In the event a franchise is granted to any private contractor, the individual subscribing to the private contractor shall still be required to pay any fees and assessment provided by this chapter. 
Chapter 27 - RESERVED 
Chapter 28 - LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 28-1. - Levy and scope.     There is hereby levied a license fee on each person, partnership, or corporation listed in this chapter, in accordance with the provisions appearing in the same. (Code 1992, § 32-101) 
Sec. 28-2. - Form of applications.     Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk. (1)  An application fee will be assessed based on the cost to process the application. Said fee shall be established by the city council from time to time. (2)  Each applicant shall sign a consent form authorizing the city police department to process a criminal background check. (Code 1992, § 32-102; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 32-102) 
Sec. 28-3. - Penalties. (a)  Any person, firm, company. or corporation required by this chapter to obtain a license to engage in any trade, business, or profession within the city limits, who shall fail to make application therefor within the time limits prescribed, shall be subject and required to pay a penalty of 50 percent of the regular license fee, provided that the city clerk-treasurer, when in his judgment circumstances may seem to warrant, may grant an extension of time (in no case exceeding 60 days) within which time to file application and pay the license fee. No penalty will be charged on any license on which an extension of time has been granted. (b)  Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the city council, be fined an amount to be established by the city council from time to time, or shall be imprisoned up to 60 days, as determined by the judge. (Code 1992, § 32-114) 
Secs. 28-4—28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
Sec. 28-25. - Procedure for issuance.     The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. The city council has the right to not grant an application for any reason that it deems fit and proper for the health, safety and well being of city and its citizens. (Code 1992, § 32-103; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 32-103) 
Sec. 28-26. - Display of license.     It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. (Code 1992, § 32-104) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 28-27. - Inspections. (a)  Search of premises. Whenever inspections are a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of public peace, order, or morality that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any city officer or employee who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. (b)  Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of the public welfare that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized city officer or employee requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. (c)  Refusal to allow inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the city council may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. (Code 1992, § 32-105) 
Sec. 28-28. - Termination and renewal of business licenses. (a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 of the calendar year in which they are issued. (b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the city clerk, on or before November 15 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and be accompanied by all required fees. (c)  The licensee of each restaurant shall furnish at the time of any renewal application an affidavit that reports the percentage of the licensee's total annual gross sales derived from the sale of food products or prepared meals in the licensee's most recently ended fiscal year. (d)  An applicant for renewal of a license shall be entitled to a refund of fees tendered if he withdraws his application for renewal prior to final action on the same by the city. (e)  All license fees shall be prorated over the calendar year in which the license is to have effect. (Code 1992, § 32-106; Ord. of 6-11-2001, exh. A) 
Sec. 28-29. - Revocation, suspension, etc.     The city council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings may, on the bases of its findings, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. (Code 1992, § 32-107) 
Sec. 28-30. - Change of location.     In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, and provided that all building and zoning requirements are complied with. (Code 1992, § 32-108) 
Sec. 28-31. - Transfer of license.     All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom it is issued and no transfer of said license shall occur. (Code 1992, § 32-109; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 32-109) 
Sec. 28-32. - Duplicate licenses.     A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee as established by the city council from time to time. (Code 1992, § 32-110) 
Sec. 28-33. - Branch offices.     For the purpose of this chapter, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed, and is authorized to transact business for such owner, shall be deemed a separate place of business, for which a separate license shall be required; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. (Code 1992, § 32-111) 
Sec. 28-34. - Joint license.     A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. (Code 1992, § 32-112) 
Sec. 28-35. - False statements.     Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application herein required, or in response to any inquiries made by the city clerk or an authorized city official in carrying out his duties under this chapter, shall make the applicant or licensee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. (Code 1992, § 32-113) 
Sec. 28-36. - Schedule of license fees.     The fee schedule for licenses shall be established from year to year by the city council. (Code 1992, § 32-201) 
Sec. 28-37. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration.     The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the major lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk's office, and that line of business being noted by the city clerk upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner, and making payment of the applicable fee for that activity. (Code 1992, § 32-202) 
Sec. 28-38. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city.     Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax and shall require a separate occupation tax certificate and payment of applicable occupation tax at each location. (Code 1992, § 32-203) 
Secs. 28-39—28-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAMING DEVICES 
Sec. 28-67. - Issuance of game and/or entertainment permit.     A written permit, in addition to a business license, will be required for each and every jukebox, pool table, video game, pinball machine and all similar devices operated in any business. Annual fees for each game shall be established by the city council from time to time. The fee will be applicable for the whole year or any part thereof. A permit for a business will reflect the total number of games permitted. The presence of more games in any business than the permit calls for will result in an automatic fine to be established by the city council from time to time, per excess game. (Code 1992, § 32-303) 
Secs. 28-68—28-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 28-93. - License required.     Each person, firm or company doing insurance business within the municipal corporate limits shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. (Code 1992, § 32-304(1)) 
Sec. 28-94. - Fee established.     The annual business license fee for each company authorized by the state to write life, accident, and sickness insurance, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, shall be established by city council from time to time for each separate business location of such company in the city, with an additional fee of one percent of collected gross premiums. (Code 1992, § 32-304(2)) 
Secs. 28-95—28-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local governments, limitation on imposition and calculation of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9; local laws not superseded, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135; municipal authority to license and regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
Sec. 28-111. - Definitions.     For purpose of this article, a "pawnbroker" is any person with whom property is deposited as security for the payment of a debt. The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms, and phrases used in this article. All words, terms, and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms, and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130. (Code 1992, § 32-302(1)) 
Sec. 28-112. - License fee.     The annual business license fee for operating a pawnbroker shop shall be determined by the city council. If a new license is issued July 1, or thereafter, the fee shall be one-half the annual fee. (Code 1992, § 32-302(2)) 
Sec. 28-113. - Shop operated with other businesses.     When operating a pawnbroker business in conjunction with another business, the opening and closing hours shall be the same as with the other business; provided, however, that such closing hour shall in any event be no later than 10:00 p.m. However, no pawnbroker may open his place of business or transact any business therein on Sunday. (Code 1992, § 32-302(3)) 
Sec. 28-114. - Weekly report; false statements.     All pawnbrokers shall make a correct and truthful weekly report, in writing, on Monday of each week, to the police chief at his office in the police department, wherein he shall supply the information required by section 28-120 pertaining to all property sold or pledged to them during the previous week. Such report shall be signed by the pawnbroker making such report. Any pawnbroker making any willfully false or misleading statements in such reports shall be punished as provided in section 28-116. (Code 1992, § 32-302(4)) 
Sec. 28-115. - Transactions with minors.     No pawnbroker shall receive any article in pawn or purchase any article for resale from any person under 18 years of age. (Code 1992, § 32-302(5)) 
Sec. 28-116. - Penalties.     Any pawnbroker or person running a pawnshop or employee thereof violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as the municipal court may direct, and in addition the city council may also, on proper proof, revoke the license of any pawnbroker violating the provisions of any law or ordinance pertaining to pawnbrokers. (Code 1992, § 32-302(6)) 
Sec. 28-117. - Premises open to police.     It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to admit to his premises the police chief or any other police officer who may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this article, without the formality of a search warrant. (Code 1992, § 32-302(7)) 
Sec. 28-118. - Inspection of pledges and purchases.     All articles pledged or sold to pawnbrokers shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by the police. (Code 1992, § 32-302(8)) 
Sec. 28-119. - Display of pledges.     Every pawnbroker shall have his pledges openly displayed so that the inspection authorized by this article may be easily made. (Code 1992, § 32-302(9)) 
Sec. 28-120. - Records—Generally.     Every pawnbroker shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: (1)  The date of the transaction; (2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; (3)  The name, age and address of the customer, a description of the general appearance of the customer, and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; (4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial number, model number, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; (5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; (6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; (7)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan, if payment is made by check; (8)  The maturity date of the transaction; (9)  The signature of the customer. (Code 1992, § 32-302(10)) 
Sec. 28-121. - Same—Receipt.     A receipt providing all of the information specified in section 28-120 shall be signed and a copy given to the person pledging or selling property. (Code 1992, § 32-302(11)) 
Sec. 28-122. - Same—Inspection.     The records required to be kept by section 28-120 shall be subject to inspection and examination by the police during the business hours when the proprietor or any of his agents or employees are present. (Code 1992, § 32-302(12)) 
Sec. 28-123. - Same—When entries made.     The entries required by this article shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible and, in no event, more than one hour thereafter. (Code 1992, § 32-302(13)) 
Sec. 28-124. - Same—False entries.     It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker, or his clerk, agent, or employee to make any false entry in any books kept as required by section 28-120. (Code 1992, § 32-302(14)) 
Sec. 28-125. - Goods to be held ten days.     Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least ten days before disposing of the same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. This section cannot be waived by contract, but it does not apply and is not intended to cover purchases from reputable wholesale supply houses and manufacturers. (Code 1992, § 32-302(15)) 
Sec. 28-126. - Maximum interest chargeable by pawnbroker.     Any pawnbroker may contract for and receive interest up to the rate of two percent per month, 24 percent annually, with a minimum charge of $5.00 per month on any loan. Any charge directly or indirectly made, contracted for, or received in excess of the amounts permitted by this section shall be uncollectible and the pawn or pledge shall be void. In addition, a 25 percent storage fee may be charged. Pawn shops may charge a storage fee for motor vehicles not to exceed $30.00 per day. (Code 1992, § 32-302(16)) 
Sec. 28-127. - Public posting of interest charge.     The pawnbroker is required to post, in a location that is clearly in view of the public, the maximum interest rate the pawn shop may charge. (Code 1992, § 32-302(17)) 
Secs. 28-128—28-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LANDFILLS 
Sec. 28-144. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Landfill means an area of land on which, or an excavation in which, solid waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile.     Recyclable means those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling.     Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products.     Refuse means solid waste, discarded putrescible and nonputrescible waste, including garbage and rubbish, industrial waste, household waste, demolition waste, construction waste, hazardous waste and any other waste material in a solid, semisolid, or liquid state not otherwise defined in this section, but does not include recyclable materials. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(1)) 
Sec. 28-145. - Approval to operate landfills.     No public or private landfill shall be operated within the city without prior written approval. No business license shall be granted for private solid waste handling where the applicant or a representative of the applicant has been judicially determined to have made concealments and/or misrepresentations concerning any application for solid waste handling or to operate a landfill according to any federal, state, or local laws. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(2)) 
Sec. 28-146. - Transportation of refuse.     It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking fluids or being blown from the transporting vehicle. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(4)) 
Sec. 28-147. - Landfill hours of operation.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a landfill in the city outside the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. No operation of any transportation, collection or disposal activities shall be conducted at a landfill in the city between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(6)) 
Sec. 28-148. - Testing before landfill refuse.     It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey, or cause to be conveyed any refuse or to dispose of any refuse in a landfill in the city without providing written proof in report form from an EPA-approved laboratory of scientific testing showing the constituents of any and all materials in each load of such refuse. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(7)) 
Sec. 28-149. - Refuse from areas outside the city.     It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse to a landfill within the city from outside the city limits without prior written permission of the city. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(8)) 
Sec. 28-150. - Penalties. (a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the city may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation including removal of illegally disposed of solid waste and restoration of the disposal site to that characterized by the presence of natural slopes and vegetation in all appearances to be of a pristine nature. (b)  Any person who shall do anything or fail to do anything prohibited by any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be assessed with a fine to be determined by the city council, from time to time and may be liable to pay all costs and expenses involved in such case. Each day any violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. of 12-14-1998(12)) 
Chapter 29 - RESERVED 