Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; incorporation of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.     The general ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Arcade, Georgia, and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Arcade City Code." (Code 1992, § 1-101) State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction.     The following rules of construction shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the city council unless the context requires otherwise: (1)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (2)  Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. (3)  Tense. The use of any verb in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and present when applicable. (4)  Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. (5)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. (6)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any Code provision or ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or a holiday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. (7)  Number. The singular or plural number each includes each other, unless the other is expressly excluded. (8)  Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. (Code 1992, § 1-102) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the city council unless the context requires otherwise:     Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advise and consent" of the city council is used in this Code it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council.     City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Arcade, Georgia.     City council, council. The term "city council" or "the council" includes the mayor and all councilmembers who are currently serving the City of Arcade, Georgia.     City limits or corporate limits. The term "city limits" or "corporate limits" means the corporate limits (legal boundaries) of the city.     Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances of the City of Arcade, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Councilmember and member of the city council. The terms "councilmember" and "member of the city council" mean a member of the governing body of the City of Arcade.     County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Jackson, Georgia.     Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of Arcade, Georgia.     Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of the City of Arcade, Georgia.     Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the judge of the municipal court.     Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Arcade, Georgia.     Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means a violation of the state criminal law punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00 or confinement in a county or other jail for a term not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.     Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city" or "municipal corporation."     Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" or "sworn."     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city council of a general and permanent nature.     Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.     Person. The term "person" means a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, cooperative, nonprofit membership cooperation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.     Personal property. The term "personal property" means every specie of property except real property, as hereinafter defined.     Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.     Property. The term "property" means real property, personal property, and mixed estates and interests.     Real property. The term "real property" means lands, tenements, and hereditaments.     Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required.     Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character.     Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways.     Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when a person cannot write.     State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia.     Statute reference. Whenever reference is made to, for example, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-1, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-1-1, as amended, or to whatever section is cited.     Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city.     Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, means any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.     Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days.     Writing or written. The term "writing" or "written" means printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.     Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1992, § 1-103) State Law reference— Construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-4. - Section headings; editor's notes and references. (a)  The headings of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the headings, is amended or re-enacted. (b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. (Code 1992, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amending Code. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Arcade, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. (c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Arcade, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number, as the case may be. (Code 1992, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. (Code 1992, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. (a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. (b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. (c)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. (Code 1992, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections, and sections of this Code. (Code 1992, § 1-108) State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalty where no penalty provided. (a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: (1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; (2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or (3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. (c)  Except as otherwise provided: (1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment, or any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. (2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. (3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. (d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. (e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. (Code 1992, § 1-110) State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-10. - Property annexation procedures.     Pursuant to the Georgia Municipal Code, all annexations and deannexations shall be undertaken in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36. (Code 1992, § 1-111; Ord. of 3-9-1993; Ord. No. 2011-03, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 1-11. - Substantive compliance with Code.     Substantive compliance with any requirement of this Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of the Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; (2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; (3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; (5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any city officer or city employee; (6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; (7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; (8)  Any appropriation ordinance; (9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; (10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; (11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a planning commission, including joint commissions; (12)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; (13)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city; (14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; (15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; (16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; (17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; (18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and (19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; administrative powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority.     The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the city council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1992, § 3-10) 
Sec. 2-2. - Oaths.     All officers and employees required by the Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths:     "I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." (Code 1992, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-3. - Bonds.     Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council may require any department head, city official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the city council. Said bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation, or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the city council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. (Code 1992, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-4. - Compensation.     Each city officer and city employee shall receive such compensation as is provided from time to time by resolution. (Code 1992, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-5. - Miscellaneous fee schedule.     A miscellaneous fee schedule will be established by the city council, from time to time, and be held by the city administrator. (Ord. of 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-6. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City official means the mayor, members of the city council, and any individuals appointed by the mayor and/or the city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this chapter by the city council.     Employee means any individual who is a full-time, part-time or contracted city employee.     Immediate family means the spouse, child, parent or sibling of a city official or employee.     Interest means any direct or indirect financial gain accruing to a city official or employee as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, the city. The term "interest" shall not mean any direct or indirect financial gain, which is remote or insignificant.     Public property/publicly-owned means anything of value, regardless of value, owned or in the possession of the city on behalf of the community. 
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
Sec. 2-31. - Election.     The mayor and five councilmembers elected at the general municipal election in November 2009 shall serve for and during the four-year terms for which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. Of those five persons elected as councilmembers at the general municipal election in 2013, the three elected councilmembers who received the least number of votes shall serve for terms of two years each and until their successors are elected and qualified; and the two councilmembers who received the highest number of votes during the November 2013 election, and the mayor elected at the general municipal election in 2013, shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are elected and qualified; and all shall take office on January 1 following their elections. Thereafter, all successors to the mayor and five councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are elected and qualified, and all shall take office on January 1 following their elections. (Code 1992, § 3-201; Ord. No. 2012-1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 2-32. - Qualifications for office.     Any person whose principal place of residence is within the corporate limits of the city and who is both a qualified voter of the city and at least 18 years of age at the time of election shall be eligible for the office of mayor or city councilmember. Should the mayor or any member of the city council cease to maintain his principal place of residence within the city during his term of office, his office shall thereby become vacant. (Code 1992, § 3-202) 
Sec. 2-33. - Vacancies.     In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or a city councilmember from failure to elect, death, removal, or any cause whatsoever, such vacancy shall be filled by a special election ordered by the city council to take place not more than 60 days from the time such vacancy occurs, under the same rules and regulations that govern other elections in the city. The city clerk shall cause notice of the holding of such election, including the time and purpose, to be published once a week for two weeks prior to such election in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. (Code 1992, § 3-203) 
Sec. 2-34. - Meetings.     The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second Monday of the month at 7:00 p.m., in city hall, unless otherwise ordered by the city council; provided that the mayor may convene the city council whenever, in his opinion, the public business requires it, and he shall do so upon the application of three members of the city council. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public. (1)  Notice. Notice of regular meetings shall be available to the general public by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to such meeting, and a notice containing the time, place, and date shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the city council. Notice shall also be given to each councilmember individually by the city clerk. Whenever any meeting required to be open to the public is to be held at a time and place other than at the time and place prescribed for regular meetings, the city council shall post a written notice for at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting and by giving written or oral notice to the legal organ of the county. When special circumstances occur, and are so declared by the city council, a meeting may be held with less than 24 hours' notice upon giving such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances including notice to said legal organ or a newspaper having a general circulation in the county at least equal to that of the legal organ. (2)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. (Code 1992, § 3-204; Ord. of 10-12-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-35. - Standing committees.     The city council is authorized to create standing committees as necessary. (Code 1992, § 3-205) 
Sec. 2-36. - Rules for the conduct of business. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the conduct of city council meetings. (1)  Call to order. All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting, and shall immediately call the city council to order. (2)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk or his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. (3)  Quorum. The mayor or mayor pro tempore and three councilmembers, or four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum; provided, however, that when no more than four members are present at least three affirmative votes to pass any resolution or ordinance shall be required. (4)  Orders of business. The business of the city council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: a.  Call to order by presiding officer; b.  Roll call; c.  Approval of minutes of previous meetings; d.  Petitions and communications; e.  Reports of standing committees; f.  Reports of special committees; g.  Unfinished business; h.  New business; i.  Adjournment. (5)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a city council meeting is requested by a member of the city council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. (6)  Reports by committees. a.  Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council or show good cause that no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. b.  Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. (7)  Manner of addressing council. No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. (8)  Limits for addressing council. Any person not a member of city council, who desires to address the city council, shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, and then shall step up in front of the rail, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the city council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to five minutes, unless additional time is granted by the city council. (9)  Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and inter-local agreements. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and inter-local agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner: a.  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the city council unless ordered by a majority vote of the city council, or requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. b.  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before presentation to the city council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction and the administration of the subject matter would devolve, and be approved by said department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld. In the event the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the city council and give the reason advanced by the department head for withholding approval. c.  Introduction and adoption. 1.  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the city council, and any member of the city council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters, or subjects be adopted. 2.  An ordinance will be put in its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced. 3.  An ordinance, resolution, or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole city council. d.  Effective date. No ordinance shall take effect until five days after the date of its publication, except that an ordinance passed by a majority plus one of the whole membership of the city council, designated therein as a public emergency ordinance necessary for the protection of public health, public safety, public property or the public peace, may be made effective upon adoption. (10)  Recording vote. Whenever any member shall request it, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on any questions taken. (11)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any member of the city council who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. (12)  Open meetings and executive session. All meetings shall be open to the public in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 unless the material to be discussed is privileged under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-2 or is excluded from O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 by an exception under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. (b)  The city council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by a councilmember, meet in executive session. Attendance at such session shall be limited to the mayor and members of the city council and such invitees as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the city council. (c)  When any meeting is closed, the city council shall follow the guidelines established under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4, entering the reason for closure in the minutes. Said meeting shall only be closed after a majority of councilmembers have voted to close the meeting. (Code 1992, § 3-206; Ord. of 5-27-1993) 
Sec. 2-37. - Legislative authority generally.     The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the city government in the manner set forth in this chapter; provided that the same is not in conflict with the city charter, the constitution or laws of the state, or the Constitution or laws of the United States of America. (Code 1992, § 3-207) 
Sec. 2-38. - Compensation.     The city councilmembers shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city council, from time to time. (Ord. No. 2011-01, § 3-208, 6-13-2011) State Law reference— Salary of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-39—2-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR 
Sec. 2-65. - General authority.     The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city government, shall enforce the city laws and shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties. (Code 1992, § 3-301) 
Sec. 2-66. - Duties.     The mayor shall have the following duties: (1)  Presiding at meetings. To preside at all meetings of the city council; but the mayor shall not be allowed to vote at such meetings except in the case of a tie vote by the city council on any question. (2)  Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting of each year, or as soon thereafter as is expedient, standing committees for that year; but the mayor may at any time alter the committees and make such changes as the interest of the city may require. (3)  Appointment of officers and employees. To appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all city officers and city employees whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. (4)  Dismissal, suspension, and discipline of officers and employees. To dismiss, suspend, or discipline all officers and employees under his control for any reason not prohibited by law, including, but not limited to: a.  Negligence or inefficiency in performing the duties of the position held; b.  Unfitness to perform assigned duties; c.  Insubordination; d.  Misconduct; e.  Conduct reflecting discredit on the department; f.  Failure to report for work without justifiable cause; g.  Chronic absenteeism; or h.  Political activity in violation of municipal regulations. Nothing in this section shall change at-will status of employment. The city council reserve all rights to terminate an employee at any time, with or without notice, in accordance with the City of Arcade Employee Handbook, published May 31, 2007. (5)  Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds, and bonds of the city when duly authorized by the city council. (Code 1992, § 3-302; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 3-302, 2-11-2008) 
Sec. 2-67. - Powers.     The mayor shall have the following powers: (1)  Rule-making. To prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whoever prescribed, subject to the city council's power to amend or repeal. (2)  Investigation. To investigate and to examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the city council to aid in such investigations, examinations, or inquiries. (3)  Overriding. To set aside any action taken by a department head and to supersede him in the functions of his office. (4)  Delegation. To direct any department to perform the work for any other department, and to authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person. (5)  Spending. The mayor shall have the power to authorize expenditures under circumstances when it is unreasonable to call a city council meeting. Such expenditures shall be subject to city council approval at the next city council meeting. (Code 1992, § 3-303) 
Sec. 2-68. - Mayor pro tempore.     During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall elect one of its members to act as mayor pro tempore, who, during any temporary absence or disability of the mayor, shall assume the powers of the mayor. (Code 1992, § 3-304) 
Sec. 2-69. - Acting mayor.     In the event of a vacancy in the office of the mayor, the city council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. (Code 1992, § 3-305) 
Sec. 2-70. - Grounds for removal.     The mayor or any member of the city council shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: (1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; (2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; (3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by the Charter or by law; (4)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of the Charter; (5)  Abandonment of office or neglecting to perform the duties thereof, including, but not limited to, failure to attend three consecutive meetings or absence from six meetings during any 12-month period, except if granted a leave of absence by the city council, which leave shall be entered upon the minute book; or (6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by the Charter or by law. (Code 1992, § 3-306; Ord. of 10-12-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 2-71. - Procedure for removal.     Removal of any elected officer from office shall be brought about in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 45-11-4 and shall be brought before the county superior court. (Code 1992, § 3-307) 
Sec. 2-72. - Compensation.     The mayor shall receive compensation at a rate to be determined by the city council, from time to time. (Code 1992, § 3-308; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 3-308, 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 2-73—2-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY CLERK/TREASURER 
Sec. 2-103. - Election.     At its first regular meeting after election and qualification, the city council shall elect a city clerk who is neither the mayor nor a member of the council. (Code 1992, § 3-401) 
Sec. 2-104. - Term of office.     The city clerk shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and until a successor is elected and qualified. (Code 1992, § 3-402) 
Sec. 2-105. - Duties of city clerk.     The city clerk or his designee shall have the following duties in the capacity of city clerk: (1)  To attend all meetings of the city council; (2)  To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the city council, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book; (3)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and place them before the city council at the meeting of the city council next succeeding receipt thereof; (4)  To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the city council; (5)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; (6)  To attend all sessions of the municipal court; (7)  To keep a docket in which shall be entered the names of all persons tried by the municipal court, the nature of the alleged offense, the date of the trial, and disposition of the case (amount of fine or number of days of imprisonment or other penalty); (8)  To issue all summonses, processes and subpoenas to witnesses that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council; and (9)  To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (Code 1992, § 3-403) 
Sec. 2-106. - Duties as city treasurer.     The city clerk shall have the following duties in the capacity of city treasurer: (1)  To receive all money due the city, including, but not limited to, taxes, and to pay out the same only upon orders passed by the city council and signed by the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore; (2)  To keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and the source and disposition thereof, which book shall be open for inspection by the public and the city council; (3)  To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance; and (4)  To furnish the city council with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter. (Code 1992, § 3-404) 
Sec. 2-107. - Compensation.     The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk/treasurer from time to time. (Code 1992, § 3-405) 
Secs. 2-108—2-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, DEPARTMENTS 
Sec. 2-128. - Administrative policy and procedures. (a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor. (b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: (1)  Be considered "at-will" employees and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor; (2)  Be immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; (3)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor, such new practices as appear to be a benefit to the service and to the public; (4)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective departments to the mayor; (5)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor; (6)  Have power, when authorized by the mayor, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under them; and (7)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. (c)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor, to any other department, such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. (d)  Records. All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service herein below prescribed. All documents of the city shall be retained in accordance with and for the periods prescribed in the Retention Schedules for Local Government Paper and Electronic Records published by the state archives division of the secretary of state's office. (e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: (1)  Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. (2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from the public. (3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed herein. (Code 1992, § 3-103; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 3-103, 2-11-2008; Ord. of 10-13-2008(1); Ord. No. 2011-02, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-129. - City attorney. (a)  Appointment and qualifications. No person shall be appointed city attorney unless he is a member in good standing of the Georgia Bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least two years preceding his appointment. (b)  Oath. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for city officers. (c)  Powers and duties. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and, in such capacity, shall: (1)  Advise the city council or its committees or any city officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; (2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the city council or any committee thereof, and keep the Code of Ordinances of the city up to date and properly indexed; (3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the city council, or any of its committees, or any city officer; (4)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city; (5)  Prepare, when authorized by the city council, all charges and complaints against and appear in the municipal court in the prosecution of every person charged with a violation of this Code or of a city ordinance, or of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter; and see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city; (6)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the city council; (7)  Make immediate report to the city council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest; (8)  Make an annual report to the city council as to the status of all pending litigation in which the city has an interest; (9)  Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise, or submit to arbitration any action, causes of action, accounts, debts, claims, demands, disputes, and matters in favor of or against the city or in which the city is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may hereafter arise not involving or requiring payment in excess of $500.00; (10)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city: a.  All suits in which the city has or has had an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the city or any department or official thereof; and (11)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the mayor or city council. (d)  Compensation. The city attorney shall submit to the city council a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month. (Code 1992, § 3-501; Ord. of 2-8-1994) 
Sec. 2-130. - Police department. (a)  Composition. The police department shall consist of the police chief and such other officers and personnel as the city council shall prescribe. (b)  Police chief. (1)  Appointment and powers. The police chief shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall be chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the city council. In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. (2)  Duties. The police chief shall have the following duties: a.  To serve as clerk of the police court whose duties shall include: 1.  To attend meetings of the city council and all trials before the police court; 2.  To keep an execution docket, in which he shall enter the names of all persons tried and fined by the police court, the nature of the offenses, dates of trials, amount of fines and return of the police officers thereon; 3.  To issue all summonses, processes and subpoenas to witnesses that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council; b.  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments and rules of the city council; c.  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the police court; d.  To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced; e.  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof; f.  To protect the rights of persons and property; g.  To oversee the conduct of the officers of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; h.  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all activities and investigations; i.  To submit to a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer; j.  To submit monthly to the state department of public safety the "Uniform Crime Report" prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 35-3-36 et seq.; and k.  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor or city council. (3)  Conduct. Officers shall be subject to and shall abide by all rules and regulations governing employment with the city, including the city employee handbook. (c)  Police officers. (1)  Qualifications. Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall meet the qualifications and training prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. (2)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. (3)  Conduct. Every member of the police department shall conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Officers shall abide by all rules and regulations governing employment with the city, including the city employee handbook. Prohibited conduct shall be subject to include, but not be limited to, the following: a.  Absence from regular hours of duty without permission; b.  Sleeping on duty; c.  Insubordination or disobedience of orders; d.  Drinking any malt or intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform; e.  Willful maltreatment of any person or prisoner; f.  Using profane language; g.  Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business or operation of the police department without the consent of the police chief; h.  Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty; i.  Accepting bribes of money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kid from a person arrested or from any friend on his behalf while he is in custody or after his release or discharge; or j.  Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duty. (d)  Arrests. City police officers may make arrests for violations of municipal ordinances and state laws when such violations are committed in their presence or when they have obtained a valid arrest warrant from the judge of the municipal court or from some other proper authority. In exercising such power of arrest, all police officers shall see that all necessary warnings are given to the accused as required by law. (e)  Entering private dwellings. No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. (f)  Disposition of stolen, abandoned, or impounded property. All personal property which comes in to the custody of the police department, where said property has been stolen or impounded, or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of ten days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of said property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. If after the expiration of ten days the property is unclaimed, the police chief shall advertise the property for sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed. Such advertising shall take place at least 30 days before the date set for the sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of the sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. (Code 1992, § 3-601; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 3-601, 2-11-2008) 
Secs. 2-131—2-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sec. 2-159. - Purpose.     The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted to: (1)  Identify standards of ethical conduct for all public servants; (2)  Promote public confidence in the integrity of public servants; (3)  Require that public servants act not only to avoid unlawful activity but to also avoid even lawful activity when the appearance of impropriety would lessen the public's trust; and (4)  Establish penalties, as appropriate, for public servants who violate the public trust. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. I)) 
Sec. 2-160. - Scope of persons covered.     The provisions of this article shall be applicable to any member of the city council, and any board, commission, committee, or other voting body, and any agent, employee, department head, supervisor or official, whether elected or appointed, who is authorized to act in any capacity under the authority of the city. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. II)) 
Sec. 2-161. - Standards of conduct.     City officials and city employees shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality. All city officials and employees shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Standards of conduct to be followed by all city officials and employees shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is in the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. (2)  No city official or employee shall request to use, use, or permit the use of any publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, personnel or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. (3)  No city official or employee shall have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts with his responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good, or directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his office or received due to his position. (4)  A city official or employee shall be deemed to have a financial interest in transactions involving the following: a.  Any person in his immediate family. b.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby he may receive any payment or other benefits. c.  Any business in which he is director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder. (5)  No city official or employee, in any matter before the council, board, or commission in which he has an interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record, such interest prior to any discussion or vote. Where an interest exists, no city official shall participate in the deliberation or voting on the matter before the council, board, or commission. (6)  No city official or employee shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. (7)  No city official or employee shall disclose any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city not made available to the general public. (8)  No city official or employee shall use the attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. (9)  All meetings of the city council shall be conducted in accordance with the O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14, as amended. (10)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving a city official from making the disclosures required under O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., or abstaining from voting as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. IV)) 
Sec. 2-162. - Receipt of complaints; appeal. (a)  Filing. All complaints filed against any city official or employee shall be filed in writing with the city clerk and referred to the city council in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. (b)  Review and investigation. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city council, excluding any member against whom the complaint has been filed, if applicable, shall: (1)  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary action, or is to be considered for further investigation. (2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the city council shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. (3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. (4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. All actions taken by the city council shall be taken within 45 days of receipt of the complaint. The decision by the mayor and council shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest within five business days of reaching a decision. (c)  Right to appeal. Decisions of the city council pursuant to this article concerning members of the city council shall be reviewable by the superior court of the county. In order to be reviewed, a notice in writing must be filed within 30 days of receipt of the notice of the decision of the city council. Review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence considered by the city council, which supported the decision of the city council. Provided, however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the superior court. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. V)) 
Sec. 2-163. - Statute of limitations.     No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than six months after a violation of this article is alleged to have occurred, and a complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. VI)) 
Sec. 2-164. - Penalty.     Any persons violating any provisions of this article are subject to any one or a combination of the following, which the city council deems appropriate under the circumstances: (1)  Public admonition; (2)  Public reprimand; (3)  Suspension; (4)  Demotion; (5)  Forfeiture or removal from office; (6)  Termination from employment; (7)  A cease and desist order, which must be enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction; and (8)  A fine in the maximum amount permitted by law. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. VII)) 
Sec. 2-165. - Liberal construction of article.     The provisions of this article are to be construed liberally, to the end that the public interest be fully protected, and shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and applicable provisions of the city Charter. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this article and any applicable federal, state or city Charter provision, which does not expressly provide otherwise, the federal, state or city Charter provision shall control. To the extent permitted by law, all ordinances, resolutions or rules, and parts of ordinances, resolutions or rules inconsistent with the article are hereby repealed. (Ord. of 6-14-2010, exh. A(art. VIII)) State Law reference— Code of ethics for governmental service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-10 et seq. 
Chapter 3 - RESERVED 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 4-1. - Sale in the city limits; license a privilege. (a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city limits under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. (b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. (c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words:     "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." (d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(A); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(A)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.     Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section.     Bar/tavern means any business that does not maintain a food service license, but has a pouring license to offer mixed alcoholic drinks, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine for consumption on the premises.     Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "non-alcoholic beer" which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and contains less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent, alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine.     Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment will be prepared to serve food every hour it is open and will derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. An indoor entertainment hall is specifically excluded from this definition of an eating establishment.     Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 50 rooms available for hire and have one or more public dining rooms with an adequate kitchen. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this chapter and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this definition.     House of worship means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.     Indoor commercial recreational establishment means, and is limited to, an establishment which: (1)  Regularly serves prepared food, with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), is prepared to serve food every hour it is open and derives at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities; and (2)  Wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Outdoor commercial recreation is not included, nor shall concession sales of alcoholic beverages be permitted. Bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually-related entertainment activities and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments, provided that no indoor commercial recreational establishment shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale during the time it is sponsoring events which primarily attract persons under the lawful drinking age in the state.     Indoor entertainment hall means a publicly- or privately-owned commercial establishment which: (1)  Provides professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on site, indoors; (2)  Does not ever provide sexually-related adult entertainment; (3)  Has at least 10,000 square feet of enclosed, heated space; (4)  Has an occupant capacity of at least 500; and (5)  Does not allow the admission of persons under the age of 18 years during hours when alcohol is served. Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales.     Indoor publicly-owned civic and cultural center means, and is limited to, a publicly-owned establishment in which the sale of food and alcoholic beverages are incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. Indoor publicly-owned civic and cultural centers may include renovated courthouses used as civic and cultural centers.     License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer.     Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation.     Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States.     Manufacturer means: (1)  Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. (2)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; in the case of malt beverages, any brewer.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale.     Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer.     Public stadium, coliseum, auditorium means a facility owned or controlled by the city or the county or any public authority established by the state, with a seating capacity of at least 2,500 people, and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food.     Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale.     Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale.     Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(B); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(B)) 
Sec. 4-3. - Penalties.     Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the county jail, unless a different penalty is set out herein. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(C); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(C)) 
Sec. 4-4. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall result in a fine of not less than $500.00 and/or 30 days in jail. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(D); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(D)) 
Sec. 4-5. - Distance requirements. (a)  No person may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in or within 100 yards of a house of worship, or within 200 yards of any school grounds. (b)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or house of worship school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state, and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. (c)  The term "house of worship" as used herein shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. (d)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground, and shall be measured in the following manner: (1)  From the main entrance of the establishment from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; (2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; (3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; (4)  To the main entrance of the house of worship, or to the nearest portion of the school grounds. (e)  No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of said location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. (f)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements herein are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a house of worship or school within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property; provided, however, that the distance requirements herein shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(E); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(E)) 
Sec. 4-6. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.     Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(F); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(F)) 
Sec. 4-7. - Application forms. (a)  All persons to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city. (b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the manager, and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city administrator and the city police department the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. (c)  All applicants shall furnish any and all personal and/or financial information as required by the city administrator or his designee and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application, with prejudice. (d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. (e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. (f)  The city administrator or his designee shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied by the city council under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Said notice shall be provided within 30 days of receipt of application. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(G); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(G)) 
Sec. 4-8. - Withdrawal of application.     Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required herein. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(H); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(H)) 
Sec. 4-9. - Licensing qualifications. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. (b)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership, or if no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. (c)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his designee that such person, partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted of or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere and have been released from parole or probation for, any crime involving moral turpitude; illegal gambling; illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law; keeping a place of prostitution; pandering; pimping; public indecency; prostitution; solicitation of sodomy; or any sex-related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, have been convicted or have pleaded guilty to or entered a plea of nolo contendere and have been released from parole or probation to any crime involving moral turpitude; illegal gambling; illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law; keeping a place of prostitution; pandering; pimping; public indecency; prostitution; solicitation of sodomy; or any sex-related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. An applicant's first-time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. Should any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude; illegal gambling; illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law; keeping a place of prostitution; pandering; pimping; public indecency; prostitution; solicitation of sodomy; or any sex-related crime, the license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. (d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. (e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. (f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. (g)  The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. (h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city administrator or his designee in such form as he may prescribe. (i)  The city council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in their judgment, circumstances are such that granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. (j)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.) as amended; except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(I); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(I)) 
Sec. 4-10. - Fee scale.     Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the fee schedule set from time to time by the city council, which is contained in this chapter and kept on file in the city administrator's office. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(J); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(J)) 
Sec. 4-11. - Fees enumerated.     License fees applicable to this chapter are set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city administrator. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(K); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(K)) 
Sec. 4-12. - Collections of sums due.     In the event any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the city administrator or his designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent, and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(L); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(L)) 
Sec. 4-13. - Transferability of license. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. (b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur; provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city administrator or his designee. (c)  In the event that a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the city administrator or his designee to be the date of severance; provided that no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, said application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted herein. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. (d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. (e)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license hereunder automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. (f)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not less than $500.00 and/or 30 days in jail. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. (g)  Should a licensee make application to the city administrator or his designee for a transfer of location, and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for a transfer of location shall pay a transfer fee as indicated on the fee schedule. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(M); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(M)) 
Sec. 4-14. - Display at place of business.     The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view, to the public, at the place of business of the licensee. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(N); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(N)) 
Sec. 4-15. - Expiration; renewal. (a)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file application with the requisite fee heretofore provided with the planning and development department on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before December 31 of each year. Any renewal applications received after December 31 shall pay, in addition to said annual fee, a late charge of 25 percent. If license application is received after January 15, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If license application is received after January 15, investigative and administrative costs will be assessed. (b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year, except for applications for temporary licenses under section 4-83, which shall not be halved. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(O); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(O)) 
Sec. 4-16. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use.     Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized, shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(P); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(P)) 
Sec. 4-17. - Suspension or revocation of license. (a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator or his designee where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and/or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The chief of police or his designee, upon notice of this revocation from the city administrator or his designee, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. (c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 4-33 shall be subject to immediate license revocation. (d)  The city administrator or his designee shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. (e)  The city administrator or his designee shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. (f)  The city administrator or his designee may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter any time such knowledge becomes known to him. (g)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law, or of any provision of this chapter, will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of his license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city administrator or his designee determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city administrator or his designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to the licensee or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. (h)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, the license may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator or his designee. (i)  Wherever this chapter permits the city administrator or his designee to suspend any license issued hereunder, but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the following guidelines of this subsection: (1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. (2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the city administrator or his designee. b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. c.  Impact of the offense in the community. d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by the licensee. e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(Q); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(Q)) 
Sec. 4-18. - Hearings. (a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. (b)  The city administrator or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city administrator or his designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city administrator or his designee within 15 days after the final order or action of the city administrator or his designee, and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee as indicated on the fee schedule. (c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city administrator or his designee unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city administrator or his designee. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the city council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he is not related to, or personal friends with, any owner of the licensed establishment in question in the appeal being considered, and that he has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the city council. (d)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the appellant within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing. (e)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: (1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; (2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or (3)  Unreasonable. (f)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(R); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(R)) 
Sec. 4-19. - Notice.     For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(S); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(S)) 
Sec. 4-20. - Audits. (a)  In the event the city administrator or his designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The city administrator or his designee may designate the city's internal auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this Code. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license issued hereunder. (b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: (1)  Monthly income or operating statements. (2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). (3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. (4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. (5)  Federal income tax return with all Forms 1099. (c)  The city administrator or his designee may waive all or some of the requirements of subsection (b) of this section if the city administrator or his designee finds that no such records exist, and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require it to keep such records. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(T); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(T)) 
Sec. 4-21. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. (a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. (b)  The city administrator or his designee may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(U); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(U)) 
Sec. 4-22. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises.     No retail consumption dealer licensed hereunder shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(V); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(V)) 
Sec. 4-23. - No adding to contents.     No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(W); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(W)) 
Sec. 4-24. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees.     Poured alcoholic beverages will be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(X); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(X)) 
Sec. 4-25. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms.     Each licensed alcoholic beverage dealer hereunder shall keep a current copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(Y); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(Y)) 
Sec. 4-26. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. (a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. (b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. (c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder without written consent from parents or guardians. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(Z); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(Z)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Failure to require and properly check identification.     It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," as used in this section, shall mean any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(AA); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(AA)) 
Sec. 4-28. - Sales to underage person prohibited. (a)  No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: (1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. This shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including, but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. (2)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. (b)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: (1)  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $250.00. (2)  For the second offense and subsequent violations within one year, a minimum fine of $500.00. (c)  Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this section, or section 3-3-23 of Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations have occurred within any 36-month period, shall be punished as follows: (1)  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of the license for a period not to exceed 90 days. (2)  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of the license for a period not to exceed one year. As to the penalties in this subsection (c), if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessor if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(BB); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(BB)) 
Sec. 4-29. - Gambling on premises prohibited.     There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed under this chapter, or any room adjoining the licensed business, owned, leased or controlled by a licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. This specifically does not apply to any games authorized by the state lottery commission. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(DD); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(DD)) 
Sec. 4-30. - Open area and patio sales. (a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on the premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city administrator or his designee. (b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. (c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid, nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city administrator or his designee and the county's fire department as required by its governing regulations or codes. (d)  The only exit from this type of area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises or through an approved fire exit (not for general public use unless an emergency exists). The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. (e)  In the event that a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city administrator or his designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the development and fire codes. (f)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel; provided that such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. Patio areas, as that term is used herein, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(EE); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(EE)) 
Sec. 4-31. - No outside consumption. (a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of alcoholic beverages for consumption at a golf course. (b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages, with the exception of a golf course. (c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages, with the exception of a golf course. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(FF); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(FF)) 
Sec. 4-32. - Premises.     No alcoholic beverage license shall be effective unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the planning and development department. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with city ordinances, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located, so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(GG); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(GG)) 
Sec. 4-33. - Solicitation prohibited.     No retail consumption dealers licensed hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or non-alcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or non-alcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the same. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(HH); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(HH)) 
Sec. 4-34. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the city police department.     Sworn officers of the city police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer and/or planning and development department staff member to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(JJ); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(JJ)) 
Sec. 4-35. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency.     The chief of police or his designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(KK); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(KK)) 
Sec. 4-36. - Bring your own bottle ("brown bagging") prohibited.     It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. (Code 1992, § 32-301(I)(MM); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(I)(MM)) 
Secs. 4-37—4-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCISE TAXES 
Sec. 4-56. - Malt beverage excise tax. (a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages in or from a barrel or bulk container, a local excise tax to be levied at a rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(1). Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except bulk cartons, a local excise tax will be levied at a rate provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(2). (b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. (c)  Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. (d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other city taxes and, in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. (Code 1992, § 4-103) State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; tax to be paid by wholesale dealer; when, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81; enforcement, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-84. 
Sec. 4-57. - Alcoholic beverage excise tax. (a)  The amount of the excise tax set on the sale of alcoholic beverages, excluding fortified wine, shall be levied per gallon and in similar proportion for bottled containers of various sizes in an amount as established by the city council from time to time. (b)  The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other city taxes and, in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. (Code 1992, § 4-104) State Law reference— Local excise tax on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80 et seq.; local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq.; enforcement, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-84. 
Secs. 4-58—4-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CLUBS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; licensing generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49 et seq.; authorization to issue licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110; prohibitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21; sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-78. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Bona fide private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the state which: (1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; (3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary.     Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club, and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Sports club means an association or corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, and organized and operated primarily to provide a location for the patrons thereof to engage in sporting events. To qualify for an alcoholic beverage consumption dealer's license, a sports club must have been actively in operation within the city for at least two years prior to an application for license hereunder; provided, however, that the two-year operational requirement shall not apply to golf club associations or golf club corporations where the selling or the serving of alcoholic beverages is to take place on the golf course premises. A sports club organized or operated primarily for serving of alcoholic beverages shall not qualify for licensing under this chapter, and accordingly shall not be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at any time. Unless otherwise indicated, a sports club licensee shall comply with all other requirements imposed upon retail consumption dealers. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(A); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(A)) 
Sec. 4-79. - Regulation of sale of alcoholic beverages.     Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable city ordinances and city regulations governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing city ordinances, rules and regulations. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(B); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(B)) 
Sec. 4-80. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements.     Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(C); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(C)) 
Sec. 4-81. - Investigative and administrative costs.     Each application for a license under this chapter shall be submitted to the city administrator or his designee and be accompanied by cash or check for the full amount of the license fee, plus the amount of the administrative fee and investigative fee. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the fee paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this chapter who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this chapter shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(D); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(D)) 
Sec. 4-82. - Hours and days of sale.     Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(E); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(E)) 
Sec. 4-83. - Eligibility for issuance of a temporary special event license. (a)  A temporary license may be issued to any person, for a period not to exceed ten days in any one year, for an approved special event. The person must make application and pay the fee that may be required and shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment with the exception of the full service kitchen requirement. (b)  The special event must meet the following criterion prior to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: (1)  The special event must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. (2)  The special event must receive approval from the city police department on crowd control, security measures, and traffic control measures. (3)  The location at which the special event is to take place must be properly zoned and approved by the planning and development department. (4)  The premises at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the city administrator or his designee. (5)  The chief of police or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if it is determined that continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. (6)  As a condition of the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the special event and provide a certificate of insurance listing the city as an additional insured with minimum combined single policy limits of $1,000,000.00. (Code 1992, § 32-301(VI)(F); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(VI)(F)) 
Secs. 4-84—4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES 
Sec. 4-100. - Distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. (a)  Locations where permitted. No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except: (1)  In eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. Such eating establishment will regularly serve food every hour it is open and derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. When eating establishments are located in hotels, motels, and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. (2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments. (3)  In an indoor publicly-owned civic and cultural center. (4)  A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium. (5)  In any bar/tavern. (b)  Investigative and administrative costs. Each application for a license under this article shall be submitted to the city administrator or his designee and accompanied by cash or a check for the full amount of the license fee, plus the amount of the administrative fee. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the fee paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has, at the time of making the new application, an existing license under this article, shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. (c)  Hours and days of sale. (1)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m., Monday through Saturday. All establishments subject to this section must close and have all customers vacate the premises by 2:00 a.m. The sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. (2)  Distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:30 a.m. the following day in the event that New Year's Day, January 1, of any year, falls on a Monday. (3)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the city council. (4)  It shall be unlawful for a business holding a distilled spirits consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages within 24 hours following any event. (d)  Violation. A violation of this section by a licensee, majority stockholder, general manager or managing partner of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in license suspension for a period of two days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday in succession. (e)  Consumption sales only. Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle. (Code 1992, § 32-301(II); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(II)) 
Sec. 4-101. - Malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. (a)  Type of retail establishment where permitted. No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except: (1)  In eating establishments having a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), which are prepared to serve food every hour that they are open. These eating establishments must be located in a zoning district which permits restaurants and drive-in restaurants as conforming uses, or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. (2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments. (3)  In an indoor publicly-owned civic and cultural center. (4)  At a publicly- or privately-owned golf course. (5)  A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium. (6)  In any bar/tavern. (b)  License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. Each application for a license under this article shall be submitted to the city administrator or his designee and accompanied by cash or a check for the full amount of the license fee, plus the amount of the administrative fee and investigative fee. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the fee paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained; provided, however, that any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has, at the time of making the new application, an existing license under this article, shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. (c)  Hours and days of sale. (1)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m., Monday through Saturday. All establishments subject to this section must close and have all customers vacate the premises by 2:00 a.m. The sale of beer and/or wine on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. (2)  Beer and/or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:30 a.m. the following day in the event that New Year's Day, January 1, of any year, falls on a Monday. (3)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the city council. (4)  It shall be unlawful for a business holding a beer and/or wine consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages within 24 hours following any event. (d)  Violation. A violation of this section by a licensee, majority stockholder, general manager or managing partner of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in license suspension for a period of two days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday in succession. (Code 1992, § 32-301(III); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(III)) 
Sec. 4-102. - Package sales of alcoholic beverages. (a)  Type of retail establishment. No alcoholic beverages, including distilled spirits, beer, and/or wine, shall be sold at retail except in establishments located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use, or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use. (b)  Hours and days of sale. (1)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. (2)  Retail package beer and/or wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the city council. (c)  Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers, or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all alcoholic beverages exposed or offered for sale. (d)  Quantity sale requirements. Single cans or bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages may be sold. (e)  License fee and amount to defray investigative costs to accompany application. Each application for a license under this article shall be submitted to the city administrator or his designee and accompanied by cash or a check for the full amount of the license fee, plus the amount of the administrative fee and the investigative fee. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the fee paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. As to any applicant for a license under this article who has at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article, there shall be no investigative and administrative fee. (f)  Conditions. Conditions of wine tasting license issuance are as follows: (1)  The holder of a retail alcohol sales license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. (2)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. (3)  Wine tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. (4)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to one consecutive two-hour period in any one day. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. (5)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. (6)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. (7)  Not more than one time per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. (8)  Holders of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. (9)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. (10)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be established by the city council, from time to time. (Code 1992, § 32-301(IV); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(IV)) 
Secs. 4-103—4-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WHOLESALERS 
Sec. 4-123. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchases. (a)  Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the city limits shall make application to the city administrator or his designee of the city for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay any license fee as established by the city council, from time to time. (b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. (c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter, provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. (d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. (Code 1992, § 32-301(V)(A); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(V)(A)) 
Sec. 4-124. - Hours and days of sale.     Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. (Code 1992, § 32-301(V)(B); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(V)(B)) 
Sec. 4-125. - Audit and penalties. (a)  In the event the city administrator or his designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. (b)  Any licensee who violates any provisions of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the common jail of the county, and the license may be suspended or revoked. (Code 1992, § 32-301(V)(C); Ord. of 3-12-2012, § 32-301(V)(C)) 
Chapter 5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 
Sec. 6-19. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section for adult bookstore, adult business, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau or introduction services, or adult store; except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult business means either: (1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically-, electrically- or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.     Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade (20 percent or more) or derives a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs.     Adult video store means any establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which derives more than five percent its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship.     Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, restaurant, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or sex-related crime, in the past five years.     Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.     School means any school building or educational building on a college campus, including governmental or church school buildings and all other buildings at such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the schools of the state; and also including daycare centers and child care facilities.     Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities means any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Sec. 6-21. - Regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  The applicant must also comply with the requirements of chapter 28, pertaining to licensing and business regulations. (c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain, for a period of two years, the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment license applicant shall employ or contract with a dancer or a person under the age of 18 years, or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. (e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday; between 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday; and on Sunday. (g)  No employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or any other employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment; nor shall the manager or owner of the adult entertainment establishment allow such activity. (h)  If any portion, or subsection, of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of its application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
Sec. 6-22. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or allow the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
Sec. 6-23. - License required.     It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any of the adult entertainment establishments as defined in this article, without an adult entertainment establishment license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
Sec. 6-24. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult video store, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau or introduction service, adult business, adult store, adult dancing establishment or erotic dance establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which adult entertainment establishment license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
Sec. 6-25. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
Sec. 6-26. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
Sec. 6-27. - Location.     No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: (1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for agricultural residential, single-family residential, rural residential, neighborhood commercial, two-family, or multifamily uses or purposes, or single-family uses or purposes. The phrase "multifamily or single-family uses or purposes" does not include the Light Industrial (LI) District or Heavy Industrial (HI) District, as shown on the official city zoning map on file with the city administrator, and located in the city hall. (2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, government building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. (3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. (4)  Within any zoning category other than the Light Industrial (LI) District or Heavy Industrial (HI) District as shown on the official city zoning map. (5)  Within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this section, distance shall be measured from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
Sec. 6-28. - Employees. (a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. (b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The police department shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the chief of police shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after the hearing may be appealed within ten days thereafter to the city council. An investigation fee to be determined by the city council from time to time shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the chief of police evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)  Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, city ordinances, rules and regulations or state laws and regulations shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of the permit. (d)  Independent contractor. For the purpose of this article, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be qualified as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or applicant of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 6-29. - Application—Required; fee. (a)  Any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity desiring to obtain an adult entertainment establishment license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk. Prior to submitting such application, a fee, to be determined by the city council from time to time, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and regulation required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. (b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 6-30. - Same—Contents. (a)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: (1)  The applicant's full true name. (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. (4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation or other entity shall be furnished. (5)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. (7)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation) have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (8)  If the applicant is a person, corporation, partnership or other entity doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit (if any), and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State. (9)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation, and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted, and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The city administrator shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. (10)  Address of the premises to be regulated. (11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented by the applicant. (12)  A certified plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises complies with the provisions contained in section 6-27. (13)  Such further information as may be required to review the applicant. (b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: (1)  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; (2)  The manager or general partner, if the applicant is a partnership; (3)  The president of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; (4)  The chief administrative official, if the applicant is any other entity, organization or association. 
Sec. 6-31. - Same—Investigation.     The city clerk shall refer the application to the police department for investigation. The police department shall have up to 21 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigative report by the chief of police is furnished to the city clerk, the application shall be forwarded to the city council for action. The city council shall grant the adult entertainment establishment license if it finds that: (1)  The required fee has been paid. (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in the state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. (6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license, or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city or county located in or out of the state prior to the date of application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. (8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. (9)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. (10)  On the date the business for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)  The proposed premises shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for agricultural residential, single-family residential, rural residential, neighborhood commercial, two-family, or multifamily uses or purposes, multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, government building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within any zoning category other than Light Industrial (LI) District or Heavy Industrial (HI) District as shown on the official city zoning map; within any city historical district; or within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. (12)  The grant of such adult entertainment establishment license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state, or the United States. 
Sec. 6-32. - Persons prohibited as licensees.     No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. (3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character. (4)  Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character. (5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
Sec. 6-33. - License—Renewal.     Adult entertainment establishment licenses may be renewed on a calendar-year basis, provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee shall be determined by the city council from time to time for the adult entertainment establishment license and shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments and enforcement of this article. Renewal applications shall be due by November 15 of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a one-calendar-year period, or for a remainder of one calendar year if issued after January 1 of any calendar year. 
Sec. 6-34. - Same—Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such adult entertainment establishment license, and in such case, the adult entertainment establishment license, upon notification to the city clerk, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an adult entertainment establishment license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
Sec. 6-35. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its adult entertainment establishment license until a new application, pursuant to the provisions of this article, has been filed with the city administrator/clerk, and approval has been obtained from the city council. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in this article, have been met. (b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his adult entertainment establishment license. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection, and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
Sec. 6-36. - Penalty for violation. (a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as set forth in the "General Provisions" chapter of the Code. (b)  Violations of this article shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment establishment license issued hereunder after a hearing before the city council. 
Sec. 6-37. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance.     Any adult business establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 6-38. - Alcoholic beverages; prohibition; exceptions. (a)  No person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity licensed under chapter 28, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. (b)  This section shall not apply to, nor prohibit the live performance of, legitimate plays, operas, or ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of their gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Sec. 6-39. - Revocation and appeal. (a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event that the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, the chief of police shall give written notice to the licensee of such action, and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation upon which the suspension or revocation is based, shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall be served upon the licensee by certified mail or by personal service at least five days prior to the time set for the hearing before the city council. (b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any of one or more of the following: (1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process; (2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; (3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of a city ordinance or a violation of any state criminal law to occur on the premises; (4)  A licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article; (5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related or alcohol-related crime by the state or by the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and (6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine, or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other city taxing ordinance. (c)  In the event that the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police; provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue in business until that date of the hearing scheduled. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing the city council shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on upholding, denying or modifying the suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
Sec. 6-40. - Adult entertainment establishment license appeal.     Any licensee, person, or entity whose license has been suspended or revoked by the city council may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari or an appeal to the superior court of the county within 30 days of such decision. 
Chapter 7 - RESERVED 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; vicious animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; substances and procedures for euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelters, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1.; impounding of animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.2; return of animal to owner, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.3; notification to owner of impoundment of animal, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.4. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abandoned animal. Any domesticated animal shall be considered abandoned when it has been placed upon public property or within a public building, unattended and uncared for, or upon the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food and water.     Animal at large means an animal which is not an animal under restraint.     Animal control officer means any person so designated by the chief of police to perform the duties of animal control and ordinance enforcement, to perform the duties of dangerous dog control officer, and further to perform the duties of animal control officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), as amended from time to time.     Animal under restraint. Any animal is considered under restraint if it is: (1)  Within the property limits of its owner or on property where its presence is expressly permitted by the property owner; (2)  Controlled by a leash; (3)  At heel or beside a competent person and is obedient to the person's commands; (4)  Participating in a hunting activity allowed by state law and is not otherwise in violation of this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, there shall be no violation of this chapter where an animal is participating in a hunting activity and crosses the property of another, unless such property has been posted with signs prohibiting hunting in accordance with state law or such property is within a residential subdivision; or (5)  Within a vehicle either parked or in transit.     Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: (1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being or domesticated animal without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or (2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domesticated animals without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.     Domesticated animal means a dog or cat, except a dog classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog by the animal control officer or other authorized agents.     Guard dog means any dog which has been trained by a recognized training facility to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. A recognized training facility shall be deemed to mean any person, partnership, company or corporation holding: (1)  A state kennel license; and (2)  A business license for either of the above purposes.     Owner means any person or legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a domesticated animal, potentially dangerous dog, or dangerous dog. This shall include any person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for its owner.     Pet means any member of a bird, mammal, or amphibian family that is under the control of a person or family of persons and which is fed, housed and/or cared for by a person or family within the city limits.     Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being or domesticated animal on public or private property at any time.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.     Records of appropriate authority means records of any federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, animal control agency, board of health, court, or records of an animal control officer as provided by this chapter.     Severe injury means any physical injury to a human or domesticated animal that results in broken bones, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic injury, or a physical injury that results in death. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Liability of county officers and employees.     The city, the animal control department, and its officers shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded in association with this chapter. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 19) 
Sec. 8-3. - Penalty for violations.     Except as provided for in section 8-30, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 for the first offense, or by confinement in the county jail for a period of one day, or by both fine and confinement. Applicable court costs shall be levied in addition to any such fine imposed. A second offense shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, or by confinement in the county jail for a period of two days, or by both fine and confinement. Any subsequent offense may be punished by the maximum amount allowed for the violation of county ordinances by state law. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 24) 
Secs. 8-4—8-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sec. 8-25. - Duty of owner to keep domesticated animals under control. (a)  It shall be unlawful at any time for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal to be an animal at large within the city limits. At no time shall any domesticated animal be permitted upon the property of another without the express permission of the property owner. (b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a person from conducting hunting, training, or field trial competition activities with dogs in the legal manner provided for in state law. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 8-26. - Abandonment.     It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to cause or permit the animal to become an abandoned animal within the city limits. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 8-27. - Cruelty to animals. (a)  The animal control department shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The animal control officer shall be authorized to refer the matter to the appropriate law enforcement officer for charges to be brought under O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. (b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as prohibiting conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of the state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, agricultural, animal husbandry, butchering, food processing, marketing, scientific, research, medical, zoological, exhibition, competitive, hunting, trapping, fishing, wildlife management, or pest control practices or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine, nor to limit in any way the authority or duty of the department of agriculture, department of natural resources, any county board of health, any law enforcement officer, dog, animal, or rabies control officer, humane society, veterinarian, or private landowner protecting his property. (c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a person from: (1)  Defending his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or (2)  Injuring or killing an animal reasonably believed to constitute a threat for injury or damage to any property, livestock, or poultry. The method used to injure or kill such animal shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely injures or kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in this section shall incur no civil or criminal liability for such act. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 16) 
Sec. 8-28. - Nuisance animals.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit that animal to be a nuisance at any time within the city limits. An animal shall be deemed a nuisance if it is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other property owner or occupant; or if the animal attacks, or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; or if the animal damages the real property of anyone other than the owner of said animal; or if it is in heat and is not confined to the property of its owner or keeper. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 17) 
Sec. 8-29. - Violations.     Any person that violates the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a citation for that violation to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 8-3. Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the county in the magistrate's court. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 23) 
Sec. 8-30. - Obstruction of officer.     It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, harass, interfere, or otherwise obstruct the performance of any animal control officer or official of the animal control department in the official performance of his duties as provided for in this chapter. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished according to the penalties described in the general provisions chapter of this Code. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 25) 
Secs. 8-31—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sec. 8-51. - Animal control department and animal control officer; department and position established.     There is hereby established for the city an animal control department with the animal control officer as the department head, and it shall be staffed with such personnel as may be from time to time authorized by the chief of police. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), the duties of the animal control officer shall be vested in any person so designated by the chief of police. The duty of the department and the officer shall be to enforce this chapter and any other ordinances identified by the city administrator. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 8-52. - Duties of the animal control officer. (a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control department to make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs, and the owners thereof, within the unincorporated areas of the county and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter. The primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control department. This department shall consist of the animal control officer, and such additional deputy animal control officers, referred to collectively as "animal control officers," as shall be designated by the chief of police. These officers shall be vested with the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter, and the officers comprising this department may also call upon such other officers, constables and employees of the magistrate's office or the county sheriff's department or the city police department as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. (b)  Animal control officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter upon receipt of a credible report of a violation of this chapter, in written or oral form, from a law enforcement officer, 9-1-1 dispatcher, board of health official, rabies control officer, or citizen. Appropriate records of complaints and the results of the ensuing investigation shall be kept in the offices of the animal control department. (c)  Animal control officers may pursue animals in violation of this chapter onto private property to effect capture and impoundment of said animals. All impounded animals shall be housed and cared for at a facility designated for such purpose by the chief of police. (d)  It shall also be the responsibility of the animal control department to enforce O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20 through 4-8-30 relating to dangerous dogs. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 8-53. - Impoundment of animals.     A dog or cat that is an animal at large or otherwise in violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the animal control department in accordance with the published policies of the animal control department. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 13) 
Sec. 8-54. - Redemption of impounded animals.     It shall be the duty of the animal control department to notify the owner, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone or by mail, as quickly as possible after the impoundment. The owner of any impounded animal may claim and take custody of the animal within five days of such impoundment, and by paying an impoundment fee plus payment of a boarding fee for each day of impoundment, and the cost of a rabies inoculation, if the animal does not display a current rabies tag, or if the owner cannot provide proof of rabies inoculation. Fees shall be set by the city administrator. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 14) 
Sec. 8-55. - Disposition of animals. (a)  The animal control department or its designee shall be authorized to dispose of any animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency (for purposes other than experimentation), if such an animal has remained unclaimed within the prescribed period of time, or if it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation. The disposal of any animal as provided herein does not relieve the owner of any liability for any violation of this chapter. If the owner of the animal is known or ascertainable, but for any valid reason cannot be reached within the prescribed period, the animal control department shall be authorized to hold the animal until such a time as the owner can be reached. (b)  No unclaimed dog or cat shall be released for adoption without being sterilized or without written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days of the specified date in the contract for puppies and kittens under two months of age. The city administrator shall develop the fees to be paid at the time of adoption for dogs and for cats. Adoption fees set by the city administrator will include the following: physical exam, rabies shot, and spaying or neutering at the appropriate age. The adoption fee shall be collected and disbursements shall be made to the participating veterinarian who actually performs the service. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 15) 
Sec. 8-56. - Records.     It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep and maintain current and accurate records of all activities and transactions of his position. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, incident reports; a description of each animal placed in custody; the date, time, and circumstances of impoundment or receipt of the animal; the date, time, and circumstances of the disposition of the animal; all fees of every kind that are collected; and any other such records that are deemed proper and necessary to provide an accurate accounting of the enforcement activities. Such records shall be retained for a period of not less than 12 months and shall be open for public inspection at any time during normal business hours. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 18) 
Secs. 8-57—8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL 
Sec. 8-86. - Identification and inoculation. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation and any such dog or cat shall wear a securely attached collar about its neck displaying such current rabies tag and owner identification and contact information. In the event that such tag is lost, the owner of the dog or cat shall be prepared to present documentation of current rabies inoculation. No person shall vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies unless permitted to do so under applicable state law. (b)  It shall be the duty of any person bitten by any animal reasonably suspected of being rabid immediately to notify the county board of health. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or person having possession and knowledge of any animal which has bitten any person or animal or of any animal which exhibits any signs of rabies to notify the county board of health and to confine such animal in accordance with rules and regulations of the county board of health. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 8-87. - Confinement of biting animal.     Any animal that is known to have bitten a person shall be confined for the purpose of rabies observation to the animal control facility, to a veterinary facility, or to such other facility as may be directed by the city, for a period of not less than ten days, and all expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. (Code 1992, § 30-108; Ord. of 4-13-1998, § 30-108) 
Secs. 8-88—8-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-118. - Confinement of certain dogs.     Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding sections, no dog, whether licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large and upon the premises of one other than the owner. (Code 1992, § 30-202) State Law reference— Permitting female dog in heat to roam free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 8-119. - Vaccination.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep, maintain, or allow such dog to run at large unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinary surgeon with anti-rabies vaccine, within one year preceding the date on which such dog is kept, maintained, or allowed to run at large. (Code 1992, § 30-203) 
Sec. 8-120. - Dog bites.     Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of such dog shall immediately notify the chief of police, who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises, or shall have it impounded at the owner's expense, for a period of two weeks. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the two-week period. If at the end of two weeks a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine. If the dog should die in the interim, its body shall be sent to the proper state authority for examination for rabies. (Code 1992, § 30-205) 
Sec. 8-121. - Muzzling.     Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of hydrophobia, the mayor, if he deems it necessary, may issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to confine it securely on his premises unless such dog shall have a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and impounded, unless such dog shall be noticeably infected with rabies, in which case it shall be summarily disposed of. (Code 1992, § 30-206) 
Sec. 8-122. - Violations.     Any person that violates the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a citation for that violation to appear before the municipal court, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 8-3. Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the county in the magistrate's court. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 23) 
Sec. 8-123. - Classification of dangerous dogs; notice to owner required. (a)  When a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, or when a potentially dangerous dog is reclassified as a dangerous dog, the animal control department shall notify the owner of the dog of such classification. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. Such notice shall be complete upon mailing and shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: (1)  A summary of the animal control department's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification or reclassification; (2)  The date of classification and a statement that the owner has 15 days to request a hearing on the animal control department's determination; (3)  A statement that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the city council, or its designee, and shall specify the name of the agency which shall conduct the hearing; (4)  A statement that, if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination will become effective for all purposes under this chapter on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and (5)  A form to request a hearing before the hearing board designated by the city council, and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to such hearing board. (b)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 7) 
Sec. 8-124. - Liability of owner of dangerous dogs.     The notice procedures provided for in this chapter are not essential conditions for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is held to know that such dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous if the dog has, at any time, displayed one or more of the behaviors described in the definitions of dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as provided in this chapter. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 8) 
Sec. 8-125. - Hearings; presiding body and procedure. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A §§ 4-8-22 and 4-8-24, the city council may conduct hearings relating to matters covered by this chapter, may designate a dangerous dog hearing board to conduct such hearings, or may designate the board of health to conduct such hearings. Under no circumstances shall the animal control department participate in a hearing other than to testify as to the determination that a dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. (b)  When the city council or its designee receives a request for a hearing as provided in section 8-123 it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. Notice shall be mailed to the owner at least ten days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and the city council or its designee shall receive such other evidence as they may find reasonable to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control department's determination. (c)  Within ten days of the hearing, the city council or its designee shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of their determination on the matter. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 9) 
Sec. 8-126. - Certificate of registration required.     It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to possess within the corporate limits of the city a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such certificate shall be issued annually to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog by the animal control department if the owner presents to the animal control department sufficient evidence of: (1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; (2)  The proper posting of the premises where a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning of such a dog on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; (3)  An insurance policy in the amount of at least $15,000.00 per occurrence issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal or property damages inflicted by the dangerous dog; (4)  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog; (5)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog; and (6)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 10) 
Sec. 8-127. - Annual registration fee for dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs.     An annual registration fee as established by the city council from time to time shall be charged by the city, in addition to any regular animal licensing fees, to defray the cost to register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as required in this chapter. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 11) 
Sec. 8-128. - Guard dogs.     It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, or custodian of any property on which a guard dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a conspicuous location on such property. Such notice shall consist of the words "Warning—Guard Dog" and shall be in clearly distinguishable block letters not less than five inches in height and one inch in width, and contain a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a guard dog. If a guard dog is confined within a fenced area, such notice must be conspicuously posted at every entrance and exit of such fence. (Ord. of 12-16-2002, § 12) 
Chapter 9 - RESERVED 