THE CODE OF THE CITY OF WOODBINE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ Adopted September 10, 2018 
____________ 

> 
[MUNICIPALITY] OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Steve Parrott (Mayor) 
Louise Mitchell (Mayor Pro Tem) 
Donald Harrelson (Councilor) 
C.C. Higginbotham, Jr. (Councilor) 
Dr. Rob Baird (Councilor) 
City Council 
____________ 
Ken Walker 
City Administrator 
____________ 
William Ashe 
City Attorney 
____________ 
M. Lynn Courson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1985 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. M. Lynn Courson, City Clerk, and Mr. William Ashe, City Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbine, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 2018. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WOODBINE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WOODBINE HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 36, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 3, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided: (i) With respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and (ii) As to other violations, each act is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 3, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective September 10, 2018. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City Charter, being 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 596), page 3670. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

To provide a new charter for the City of Woodbine; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city, to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority, to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city administrator, and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Woodbine in Camden County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Woodbine." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Woodbine. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Woodbine, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Sec. 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city, to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city, and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(37)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of said city that such person desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file above said notice within the time provided for in Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." [Repealed—See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of said city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." [Repealed—See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Woodbine shall consist of one election district with four at-large posts. 
(e)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1997, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected two councilmembers. Then, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1999, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmembers. It is the purpose of this section to provide a rotation system for the office of mayor and councilmembers. The terms of the offices shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 3.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  (1)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. [Repealed—See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this Act. 
Sec. 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating Section 2.16 or any other express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of all remaining councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Camden County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Camden County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Woodbine. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
Sec. 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 3.14. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 3.15. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, three councilmembers or two councilmembers and the mayor shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 3.16. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Woodbine hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 3.18. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least two councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.19. Codes. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.16 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3.20 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the Code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 3.21. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Sec. 3.22. Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Preside at city council meetings; 
(3)  Exercise oversight over all executive and administrative work of the city; 
(4)  Cause to be prepared and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in Section 3.13; 
(7)  Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(8)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(9)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in Section 3.23; 
(10)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(11)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(12)  Perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this charter, or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.23. Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented by the city clerk to the mayor within three working days after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor shall, within ten days of receipt of an ordinance, return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval, or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law on the fifteenth day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of the entire council, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city administrator, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the director's department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city administrator shall be nominated by the city administrator with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The city administrator may suspend or remove directors under the city administrator's supervision but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the city administrator's giving written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the city administrator's action by a vote of three councilmembers as provided by the city personnel policy. 
Sec. 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of the office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least three years. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position of city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
Sec. 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk. 
Sec. 4.14. - City administrator. 
(a)  The city council may appoint a city administrator who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor and the city council for the administration and conduct of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under the charter of the City of Woodbine or by and under the Code of Ordinances of the City of Woodbine. 
(b)  The city administrator shall serve for an indefinite term and mayor and council shall affix the compensation for the position. 
(c)  The powers and duties of the city administrator shall be as set forth by or under the charter of the City of Woodbine and by or under the Code of Ordinances of the City of Woodbine. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Woodbine. 
Sec. 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 30 years and shall be a resident of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council and the explicit concurrence of the mayor or by a vote of four members of the council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 3.14 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.12. Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees, subject to the approval of the city council, to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations and to provide for the forfeiture of such bonds in accordance with Georgia law. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party, to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary as provided by Georgia law. 
(g)  Municipal judges shall complete such training as required by Code Section 36-32-11 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-11]. 
Sec. 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Camden County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may reject or adopt in part or in total the proposed rules and regulations. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. 
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Roads. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  After the conducting of a budget hearing, the city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 10 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall set out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and make appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with any recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, amend, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.18 of this charter. 
(b)  After the conducting of a public hearing, the city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 10 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by any recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act reincorporating and granting a new charter to the City of Woodbine, approved March 2, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, Jan — Feb. sess., p. 2903), as amended, is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.15. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1985, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or profession or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or profession or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(4)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the city Charter, as amended. 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
City council and council. The terms "council" and "city council" refer to the city council of the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either…or," or "neither…nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either…or" and "neither…nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Camden County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. References to state acts are to state acts, as amended. 
Officials, officers, etc. References to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies by title only shall be construed as referring to the city officials, city employees, city boards, city commissions, or other city agencies. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" includes individuals and any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, body politic and corporate, or any combination thereof. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly-owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, court, circle, way, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto and any area owned or dedicated as public rights-of-way within the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days, unless otherwise specified. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, numbers, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1985, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references and other references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1985, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceedings pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1985, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____ , which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into this Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared inapplicable in any situation by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or degree shall not affect the applicability of such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, and section to other situations. 
Sec. 1-8. - Penalties for violation of Code. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a violation of this Code by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a violation of this Code, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or city employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  With respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  As to other violations, each act is a separate offense. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(Code 1985, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; maximum penalties which may be imposed by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c), 36-32-5; additional penalties in certain traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73. 
Sec. 1-9. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance amending the Charter; 
(2)  Any ordinance annexing or deannexing property or describing the corporate limits; 
(3)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city or providing personnel policies; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance and any ordinance levying any tax not codified in this Code; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any zoning or subdivision ordinance; 
(12)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(13)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Use of tobacco products. 
(a)  Smoking or other use of tobacco products in city buildings, within those areas of other buildings which are operated or occupied by city employees and/or the public, including leased office space and vehicles, is hereby prohibited. In addition, smoking or other use of tobacco products is hereby prohibited within 25 feet of a public entrance to an enclosed area where smoking or other use of tobacco products is prohibited. 
(b)  The city administrator shall see to the posting of each city building and vehicle affected by this chapter, indicating the use of tobacco products is prohibited within the building or vehicle by ordinance, and that violators shall be subject to prosecution. 
(c)  The county sheriff's department and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this chapter. Such citations shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of the service, shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves it. 
(d)  Persons accused of violating this chapter may be arrested and required to post a bond for future appearance in said court. 
(Code 1985, §§ 3-1201—3-1204; Ord. of 8-7-1995; Ord. of 7-6-2004) 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Meetings. 
(a)  Time of meetings. The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday of the month at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1985, § 3-204) 
State Law reference— Open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-22. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of council meetings. 
(1)  Call to order. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except as otherwise permitted by O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting; and shall immediately call the council to order. 
(2)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or his deputy shall check the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(3)  Quorum. The mayor and two councilmembers shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council and an affirmative vote by the forenamed officers, excluding the mayor or presiding mayor pro tem, except in instances where the vote of the presiding officer is necessary to break a tie, shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business except that for which a larger vote has been mandated by this Code. 
(4)  Order of business. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
a.  Call to order by the presiding officer. 
b.  Roll call. 
c.  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
d.  Petitions and communications. 
e.  Reports of standing committees. 
f.  Reports of special committees. 
g.  Unfinished business. 
h.  New business. 
i.  Adjournment. 
(5)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a councilmember, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(6)  Reports by committees. Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city council, or any member of the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. Each standing committee shall inquire into the condition the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. 
(7)  Manner of addressing council. No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(8)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer and then shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record; directing his remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to five minutes unless additional time is granted by council. This section does not apply to department heads that are at the meeting to answer questions or make statements concerning any matter. 
(9)  Resolutions, contracts and inter-local agreements. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all resolutions, contracts and inter-local agreements of the city shall be approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner: 
a.  Administrative staff approval. All resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney, or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor, or his authorized representative, where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the resolution or contract document would devolve and be approved by said department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld. In the event the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the council and give the reasons advanced by the department head for withholding approval. 
b.  Introduction and adoption. 
1.  Resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council except that the mayor or city attorney may present resolutions and matters or subjects to the council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such resolutions, matters, or subjects be adopted. 
2.  A resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it has received the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present unless the mayor vetoes the same in which case it shall not become law unless subsequently passed over his veto by a vote of a least three councilmembers. 
(10)  Recording vote. Whenever any member shall request it, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded on the minutes on any question taken. 
(11)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(12)  Elections. All elections by the city council may be by ballot, and a majority vote of the councilmembers present shall be necessary for a valid election. 
(13)  Executive session. The city council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer, or upon motion duly carried by a councilmember, meet in executive session. Attendance at such session shall be limited to the mayor and members of council and such invitees as shall be invited with the majority consent of the mayor and councilmembers present. 
(Code 1985, § 3-206) 
Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-48. - Powers. 
The mayor shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Rulemaking. To prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to this authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whomever prescribed; 
(2)  Investigation. To investigate and to examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the council to aid in such investigations, examinations, or inquiries; 
(3)  Overriding. To set aside any action taken by the city administrator or department head and to take administrative action allowed by law as he deems necessary, provided that written notice with reasons of any action overriding a department head or city administrator be provided city council within three working days of said action, and further provided that the city council may rescind said overriding order by a majority vote. 
(Code 1985, § 3-303) 
Secs. 2-49—2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-70. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. Public officials and employees of the city shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such official and employee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(2)  Requesting, using, or permitting the use of any publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
(3)  Participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving his financial or personal interest; 
(4)  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the city, unless he has made full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services; 
(5)  Appearing on behalf of any private person, other than himself, before any public body in the city; 
(6)  Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise; that would not be offered or given to him if he were not an official or employee; 
(7)  Disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the governing body; 
(8)  Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or any other person; or 
(9)  Appointing or voting for the appointment of any person related to him by blood or marriage to fill an office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages, pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(b)  Hearings and determinations. Upon sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would constitute a violation of this section, the city administrator shall conduct an investigation of the matter and take appropriate action. A report of the findings and actions shall be forwarded to the mayor and councilmembers and the complainant. At the request of the mayor, or by majority vote of council, a public hearing, conducted by council shall be held, and the accused shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through counsel. At the conclusion of said hearing, the council shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee in question. 
(Code 1985, § 3-102) 
State Law reference— Public ethics, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-71. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city administrator for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city administrator, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the city administrator as requested; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city administrator; 
(5)  Have power to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city administrator, any other department such service, labor, and materials as its own facilities permit and as may be requisitioned by the head of each department. 
(d)  Records. All municipal records, except those which, by order of a state court or by law, are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by the public during the hours of operation of the respective administrative body. 
(e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: 
(1)  Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. 
(2)  Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1985, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-72. - Oath. 
All officers and employees required by Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe to the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Woodbine; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________ during my continuance therein, so help me God. 
(Code 1985, § 3-104) 
Secs. 2-73—2-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-102. - Appointment. 
The city administrator need not be a resident of the city or the state at the time of his appointment. 
(Code 1985, § 3-501) 
Sec. 2-103. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city administrator shall take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1985, § 3-502) 
Sec. 2-104. - Powers and duties. 
The city administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To advise the mayor and council of the necessary administrative processes to ensure that the policies and ordinances of the council are fully carried out, and to supervise and direct the city clerk in the performance of his duties. 
(2)  To see that the laws of the state pertaining to the city are duly enforced. 
(3)  To be the chief personnel officer. 
a.  To develop administrative procedures for the effective recruitment, selection and promotion of city employees based on merit; 
b.  To administer a pay and classification system adopted by the city council; 
c.  To recommend equitable personnel policies to the city council; 
d.  To directly supervise each department head and provide scheduled evaluations of departmental personnel. 
(4)  To be the chief budget and finance officer. 
a.  To submit annual estimates of total city operating expenditures and revenues to the city council in the form of preliminary budget prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
b.  To keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the city. 
c.  To keep the mayor and city council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
d.  To countersign all orders, drafts, and checks authorized by the city council, subsequent to said orders drafts and checks being drawn by the city clerk and countersigned by the mayor, or mayor pro tem, and any one councilperson, after the mayor and councilperson have allowed the same by proper resolution entered on minutes. 
e.  To oversee the collection of all taxes, assessments, rentals, license fees and other charges due the city, and supervise the city clerk in the performance of his duties and further, to serve as clerk pro tempore in the absence of the clerk. 
f.  To make prudent investments of idle city funds. 
(5)  To act as the purchasing agent for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment for the city and see that the same are received as contracted for, provided that if a purchase in excess of $500.00 is involved, prior approval of city council shall be necessary and opportunity for competitive bids shall be given after reasonable advertisement. The salary of the city administrator shall be as the city council shall from time to time determine. 
(6)  To act as the information officer. 
a.  To adjust all complaints filed against any employee, department, division or policy of the city; 
b.  To cooperate with all community organizations to encourage citizen participation and city pride; and 
c.  To provide information about city policy and practices to all citizens. 
(7)  To attend all meetings of the city council and its subcommittees, unless excused by the city council, and to be responsible for the maintenance of good and sufficient minutes of all meetings of the city council and its subcommittees. 
(8)  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as deemed necessary and expedient. 
(9)  To be an ex-officer member of all boards and commissions appointed by the mayor and city council with the right to participate in all deliberations or actions, but without having voting rights. 
(10)  To sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the city council after thorough examination. 
(11)  To see that contract agreement terms are fulfilled. 
(12)  To ensure the maintenance of an up-to-date inventory of real and personal property of the city and its location. 
(13)  To ensure the development of and to offer recommendations for the city's comprehensive plan, short- and long-range city improvements and funding sources for implementation. 
(14)  To carry out such other duties and functions as prescribed by the mayor or city council through adoption of ordinances, resolutions, and policies. 
(15)  In the event that the city administrator and the city clerk is not one and the same person, it shall be the duty of the city administrator, and the city administrator shall be empowered, to supervise the city clerk in the performance of the clerk's duties as ex officio tax collector and treasurer. 
(16)  Limitations of powers and duties. The city administrator shall have no power to exercise any policy making or legislative functions whatever, nor to commit or bind the mayor or city council or any member thereof to any action, plan, or program requiring official action by the and/or city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-503) 
Secs. 2-105—2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-146. - Duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk may have the following duties in his capacity as city clerk, said duties to be subject to the direction and approval of the city administrator: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of city council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose; 
(3)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and city council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(4)  To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the council; 
(5)  To issue all summonses, processes, and subpoenas to witness that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council; 
(6)  To affix impression of the city seal on documents whenever required; and 
(7)  To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be secured by the public. 
(Code 1985, § 3-404) 
Secs. 2-147—2-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-180. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments and heads thereof: 
(1)  Department of public works. 
(2)  Director of public works. 
(Code 1985, § 3-701) 
Sec. 2-181. - Department of public works. 
(a)  Composition. The department of public works shall consist of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned thereto by the city administrator. 
(b)  Appointment of director. The director of public works shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the city administrator. 
(c)  Duties of director. The director of public works shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To have charge of and be responsible for the water distribution system, the sanitary sewer system and disposal plant, and the street lighting system; 
(2)  To have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city, including all parks, parkways, playgrounds, municipal cemeteries, buildings, and utilities, not assigned to some other department or officer; 
(3)  To have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment of the city water/sewer department, and of all buildings or places in which the same are housed or kept; and 
(4)  To perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the city administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 3-703) 
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-201. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Code 1985, § 4-301) 
Secs. 2-202—2-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-221. - Budget message. 
When introduced to the city council for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for each change; summarize the city's debt position; and include such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-303) 
Sec. 2-222. - Form and content of budget. 
(a)  The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit. 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges. 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable. 
(4)  Cash deficits in the preceding year. 
(5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation, and maintenance expenses. 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. 
(b)  The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1985, § 4-404) 
Sec. 2-223. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The city administrator may, at any time during the fiscal year, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office and the city council may by ordinance transfer part of all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1985, § 4-306) 
Sec. 2-224. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that the repayment of any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1985, § 4-307) 
Sec. 2-225. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1985, § 4-308) 
Secs. 2-226—2-244. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local government purchases generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1; public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-245. - Introduction; establishment of rules. 
The following rules and regulations, and other administrative provisions for purchasing administration, are hereby declared to constitute the purchasing policy of the city: 
(1)  Dissemination of rules. The city administrator will furnish copies of all rules and changes thereto and shall be responsible for maintaining a complete current set of the rules and regulations. 
(2)  Organization for purchasing. The city administrator is designated as purchasing officer and is responsible for purchasing for the city. 
(3)  Purchasing forms. The basic purchasing forms to be used are the requisition, request for quotation, and purchase order. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1001) 
Sec. 2-246. - Requisition. 
(a)  Description. The requisition is the form on which a department requests the goods or services it wishes to purchase It describes the item to be purchased, the quantity, and gives the name and budgetary account number of the using department. It should be prepared in duplicate with a copy retained by the originating department. All requisitions will be pre-numbered by order of use to facilitate filing, and must be signed by the using department supervisor. 
(b)  Use. The requisition is the purchasing office's authority to initiate procurement. Listed on the requisition should be a complete description of the item to be purchased (include model number and/or catalog number if possible), quantity, the date material is needed, where delivery is to be made, and suggested vendors. 
(c)  Preparation. 
(1)  Department: identify the department by name. 
(2)  Date: date the requisition is prepared. 
(3)  Account number: proper budgetary account number to which purchase is to be changed. 
(4)  Requisition number: number starting with the year, department number and consecutive number and continue on. (This will give you the number of requisition you place through your department. Example: 77-260-1, 77-260-2, etc.) 
(5)  Date needed: be specific. (Do not use ASAP, soon, etc.) 
(6)  Purchase order number: leave blank; this will be entered by purchasing office. 
(7)  Suggested vendor: optional. 
(8)  The remainder of the form is self-explanatory. If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact the purchasing office for assistance. 
(d)  Signature required. Requisitions are to be signed by the department supervisor or his authorized representative. If a department supervisor authorizes someone to sign requisitions, he shall provide the purchasing office with a list of those individuals. 
(e)  Purchasing officer. The purchasing officer is authorized to amend requisitions in regard to price and vendor in the best interest of the city. He may not change specifications without consulting the originating department. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1002) 
Sec. 2-247. - Request for quotation. 
(a)  Use. The request for quotation shall be used on all item purchases in excess of $50.00. The purchasing officer may request quotes on any purchase at his discretion. The request for quotation is to be used by the purchasing office. 
(b)  Preparation. 
(1)  Date of request date form is completed. 
(2)  Submit quote before deadline for quote. 
(3)  Item and quantity description list of items desired, number needed and full description, describe without using brand or trade names if possible. 
(4)  Give vendor name, address, phone number and name of person quoting, especially if business telephone number is given. 
(5)  Quote vendor's stated price, delivery date, and any other important information. 
(6)  Purchasing officer must be signed by person obtaining quote. 
(7)  Give P.O. number and check how the quote was obtained. 
(8)  Check reason or give full details in box listed "other;" use back of form if necessary. 
(9)  Attach quote forms to purchase order copy retained in purchasing office. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1003) 
Sec. 2-248. - Purchase order. 
(a)  Preparation. After receiving the requisition, the purchasing office will type the purchase order, assign a number and place the order, if funds are appropriated. 
(b)  Distribution of copies. Original copy of purchase order: this copy will be retained by the purchasing office. 
(c)  Processing of paper. It is the responsibility of the originating department to sign the certification on the receiving copy indicating the material has been received and is satisfactory. Then submit all necessary papers, such as packing slips and bills, to the purchasing office promptly. After a final check for completeness, payment will be made. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1004) 
Sec. 2-249. - Appropriations for purchases. 
(a)  Funds not available. If funds have not been appropriated or are not available, the originating department will be notified and the requisition will be returned. 
(b)  Additional funding. The responsibility for action to initiate receipt of additional funds rests with the originating department. A request for additional funds with complete justification should be submitted to the administrator. 
(c)  Resubmitting requisition. If funds are provided, the originating department must submit another requisition to the purchasing office. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1005) 
Sec. 2-250. - Exceptions to standard procedures. 
(a)  Blanket purchase order. 
(1)  Description. Blanket purchase orders are used for those few vendors from whom many repetitive purchases are made as required rather than issue a purchase order for each purchase; one purchase order will be issued for a specified period to cover all such purchases during that period. 
(2)  Issuing. The purchasing office will place the order with the selected vendor by issuing a blanket purchase order. A blanket purchase order is issued by writing in the description selection "term order;" items will be furnished as requested when above purchase order number is referenced. Monthly statements must be supported by signed counter tickets. 
This order expires on ________, 20___. 
(3)  Originating department responsibility. The originating department must determine those employees who will be authorized to make purchases under the blanket purchase order. They should use the blanket purchase order number to obtain the item from the vendor. They should also obtain a copy of the vendor counter ticket and forward it to the purchasing office. 
(4)  Closing blanket purchase orders. The purchasing office shall close the blanket purchase orders as they expire by writing "complete" on the copies maintained in that office, issuing a new purchase order for the coming period and informing the originating department of the new purchase order number. 
(5)  Payment. Payment of the closed blanket purchase order will be made upon receipt of the signed receiving copy from the originating department, and reconciliation of the counter tickets with vendor invoice. 
(b)  Requisition not needed. Some vendors may be paid directly by voucher, and no requisition is needed when they are paid for contractual services, fees, or reimbursement of expenditures. 
(c)  Emergency purchases. 
(1)  Description. Some departments must be able to have access to supplies under emergency conditions (i.e., conditions which adversely and unduly affect the life, health, or convenience of citizens). 
(2)  Purchase order number. Obtained emergency purchases, however, must be confirmed with a purchase order. Such purchases during working hours should be approved verbally by the purchasing office in order that a purchase order number can be assigned. That number must be given to the vendor to be used on the invoice he submits to the city. 
(3)  Requisition submitted following workday. A requisition for the emergency purchase must be submitted to the purchasing office no later than the following workday. It should indicate the emergency purchase order number and all relevant facts about the purchase. 
(4)  Emergency purchases. The city administrator, after consultation with and approval by the mayor, or in administrator's absence, the mayor alone, shall be authorized to approve purchases and services in an emergency situation without regard to the requirements set forth in ordinances and policies, where the immediate procurement of the purchases or services is essential to prevent delays in work undertaken by or on behalf of the city which may vitally affect the life, health, safety or convenience of the city or its citizens. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1006) 
Sec. 2-251. - Securing of price quotations and bids. 
The securing of price, quotations, or bids will be the responsibility of the purchasing office, subject to existing ordinances and other regulations pertaining to purchasing. Prices will be obtained by one of the following methods. Quotes are required on any purchase in excess of $50.00. 
(1)  Telephone. The greatest number of prices will be obtained by use of the telephone. 
(2)  Request for quotation. A request for quotation form will be used when the purchasing office determines that the cost of an item is relatively high or that an item is difficult to secure. This form is used to permit two or more vendors to furnish prices, in writing. An opening date of the informal bid may be designated on the front of the form. 
(3)  Sealed bid. This method will be used on all purchases exceeding $2,000.00, or when legally required or at the discretion of the purchasing officer if it will be advantageous because of price or material. If this method is used, a legal notice stating the pertinent facts of the contemplated purchase will be published in the legal organ. Sealed bids will be opened at the specific time and place as published in the newspaper. Specifications will be drafted by the originating department supervisor seeking the necessary material, and finalized by the purchasing officer in consultation with the department supervisor. 
(4)  State department of administrative services. This service utilizes the services of the state purchasing and supplies division. Under this procedure, the city may purchase on any state contract and possibly obtain a lower price due to the volume that the state purchases. The purchasing office maintains a current copy of the Field Purchasing Contracts Manual issued by the state department of administrative services. 
(5)  Local vendor preference. Definition: "Local vendor" means a bidder or offeror which operates and maintains a brick and mortar business, i.e. a physical business address, within the limits of Camden County, GA and has a current business license, has paid in full all real and personal taxes owed the city, is considered a vendor in good standing with the city and can obtain an active vendor status. 
A local presence may be used as a nominal evaluation factor where appropriate. This criterion shall not be based on political or jurisdictional boundaries and may be applied on a project-by-project basis for contracts where a need has been established for a vendor to provide a local presence, a local presence will add value to the quality and efficiency of the project, and application of this criteria leaves an appropriate number of qualified vendors. For purchases, bids, proposals or contracts less than $100,000.00 the local vendor may be given an opportunity to match the lowest price proposal, if the quotation or bid of the local vendor is within five percent of the lowest price proposal by a non-local vendor. In the event a local vendor matches the lowest price proposal, including all other terms, quality, service and conditions, then the local vendor shall be awarded the contract. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1007; Amend. of 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 2-252. - Personal liability. 
(a)  Department head's responsibility. It is the responsibility of each department supervisor to ensure that each of his subordinates is instructed in the use of these purchasing procedures. 
(b)  Personal liability for nonconforming purchases. Any purchase made not in accordance with these procedures automatically becomes the direct, personal obligation of the individual making such purchase. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1009) 
Sec. 2-253. - Future purchasing procedures. 
The city administrator is authorized to establish additional rules and regulations to effectively implement this policy. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1009) 
Secs. 2-254—2-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DONATIONS 

Sec. 2-285. - Eligible donations. 
Only donations to organizations which give a direct benefit to the citizens of the city shall, at the discretion of the city council, be considered for any type of tax advantage. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1101) 
Sec. 2-286. - Exceptions. 
This policy is not intended to exclude such organizations as the city citizen's steering committee or any organization which works for the direct betterment of our city. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1102; Ord. of 9-9-1983) 
Sec. 2-287. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days. 
See O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Code 1985, § 2-601) 
Secs. 2-288—2-307. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MUNICIPAL BONDS 
(RESERVED) [4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal bonds generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-38-1 et seq., 36-82-1 et seq., 36-82-60 et seq. 

Secs. 2-308—2-332. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-333—2-352. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-353. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Adoptions of state rules and regulations. The rules, regulations, and provisions contained in GA. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II, governing the creation, appointment, organization, powers, and duties of municipal and county planning commissions, are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions governing the planning commission of the city. 
(b)  Composition, appointment, and tenure. The municipal planning commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council. Except for the initial appointments, the terms of the members shall be for three years each. Two of the members first appointed shall be appointed for a three-year term, two shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one shall be appointed for a one-year term. Members shall serve until successors are appointed. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for unexpired terms only and in the same manner as for original appointments. 
(d)  Removal. Any member of the planning commission may be removed by the mayor or city council for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
(e)  Compensation. All members of the municipal planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  Officers and rules of procedure. The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairperson and shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city or of the planning commission. The planning commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or commission shall determine; shall adopt rules for the transaction of business; and shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to public inspection. Employees and staff may be appointed by the planning commission as necessary. 
(g)  Powers and duties. The municipal planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare plans for physical, social, and economic growth in an effort to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare of the city. In carrying out its objectives, the planning commission shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city; 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a zoning ordinance and map for the city; 
(3)  To prepare and recommend for adoption regulations for the subdivision of land within the city limits and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
(4)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a plat or plats of an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, unlined or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites and provide for the regulation of construction of buildings or other structures within such lines; 
(5)  To cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or quasi-public agencies, and to expend such funds; and 
(6)  To exercise all other powers and duties conferred upon municipal planning commissions by GA. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV and by any other provisions of state law. 
(Code 1985, § 3-801) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Alcoholic Beverage, Malt Beverage and Wine Ordinance of the City of Woodbine." 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-1)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons. 
Consumption on premises means the sale or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. The license issued to such person shall be known as a consumption-on-premises license. 
Council means the city council of the City of Woodbine. 
Department means the state department of revenue. 
Distilled spirits means all beverages containing any alcohol obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Individual means a natural person. 
Keg means barrel or bulk containers of malt beverage commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
Licensed premises means the building and real property described in the license application as approved by the city council where the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wines, for consumption on premises, is permitted to be sold. 
Licensed retailer means any person (not a producer) selling or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine in an original package not for consumption on the premises where sold and holding a valid license issued by the city and the state. 
Licensed wholesaler means any person (not a producer) who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for purposes of resale to licensed retailers, to licensed wholesalers, or to persons holding a consumption-on-premises license. 
License officer means the chief administrative officer of the city in charge of licenses issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverages obtained by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such product in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverages" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container, as delivered by a licensed wholesaler or licensed retailer. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
Wine means all alcoholic beverages containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruit, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-2)) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-3. - In certain retail establishments only; for consumption on premises. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages, wine or malt beverages shall not be sold at retail for consumption on premises except in the following types of businesses: In restaurants, other than fast food restaurants, serving prepared food which is offered to the general public and where chairs, tables and counters are provided to seat and serve 15 or more persons. Such establishments shall be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants and shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Where meals with substantial entrees selected by patrons are served; 
(2)  Has adequate facilities and sufficient full-time employees to prepare, cook and serve meals for consumption at tables in a dining room located in the licensed premises; and 
(3)  Derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the sale of meals prepared, cooked and consumed on the licensed premises, as determined by totaling all of combined retail outlets located on the licensed premises. 
For the purpose of this section, the term "fast-food restaurant" means a restaurant that derives more than 15 percent of its sales by use of a carry-out window serving persons outside the building, who are either on foot or who are the occupants of motor vehicles. 
(b)  In hotels or motels, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public to be a place where food is served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate rates to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 15 or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations for guests, and having one or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and with a seating capacity for at least 15 people; and which have a license issued by the state. In lounges that are located within a hotel or motel and have seating accommodations for not less than 15 persons and where access to the lounge is located through the hotel or motel restaurant. 
(c)  In private clubs organized and existing under the laws of the state as a bona fide association of individuals organized for fraternal purposes, conducted solely for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries, and only operated on the lodge system with ritualistic form of work, having a representative form of government and at least 25 regular members paying monthly dues, where no part of the net earnings of which shall inure to the benefit of any shareholder or member, provided further that no member, officer or agent, or employee of the club is compensated, directly or indirectly, by any form of commission or other compensation based on the amount of profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. 
(d)  In golf course clubhouses. Malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises may also be sold in the clubhouse, refreshment stands or beverage carts located within the boundaries of the golf courses. 
(e)  In bowling alleys, provided that the following rules and regulations are followed: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages will be served in the bowling alley, except through a service window and then only when delivered directly to the customer at that location; 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages will be consumed in the area of the bowling lanes, but only in a seating area set aside for spectators located separately and apart from the bowling lanes; and 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages will be served in any part of the bowling alley prior to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-3)) 
Sec. 4-4. - Unlawful practices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages of any kind who derives more than 20 percent of their gross annual income from the sale of such alcoholic beverages to permit, perform, promote, advertise, stage, suffer, or in any way to allow any person to expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities in, on or about the licensed premises. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral and anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, or oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic and lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-3.1)) 
Sec. 4-5. - Sale of distilled spirits and fortified wine; not for consumption on premises. 
No packaged sales of distilled spirits for off-premises consumption shall be allowed in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-4)) 
Sec. 4-6. - Sale of malt beverages and wine; not for consumption on premises. 
(a)  No malt beverages or wines shall be sold at retail except as follows: 
(1)  In retail stores devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products to the general public and located in zoning districts in which food or convenience stores are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where existing food or convenience stores exist as a nonconforming use. In order for a store to be devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products, the building must contain at least 1,000 square feet and 60 percent of the retail floor area of the building must be devoted exclusively to the sale of groceries or related grocery items. For the purpose of this chapter, groceries and related grocery items are defined so as to exclude any drinks containing any amount of alcohol. 
(2)  In a facility duly licensed by the city to sell at retail wine and malt beverages in the original unbroken package. 
(3)  In a marina providing space to secure moorings for boats, motorboats and yachts and offering or supplying repairs, fuels, refreshments and other facilities. 
(b)  All licensees selling kegs of malt beverage shall, at the time of the sale of such, record the serial number of the keg along with the name and address of the buyer. Further, the licensee shall require the buyer to provide documentation, in the form of a driver's license, etc., to verify the identity of the buyer. Said record shall be maintained for a period of six months, and shall be provided to the county sheriff's department upon request. For purposes of this subsection, the form utilized by the state department of revenue, alcohol and tobacco division, properly filled out, shall be sufficient to satisfy the information retention requirements herein. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-5)) 
Sec. 4-7. - Hotel in-room service license. 
Any hotel, motel, inn or other establishments which meets the requirements set out in section 4-3(b), and which has been licensed by the state, is hereby authorized to provide in-room service as defined in this section. In order to qualify for a hotel-in-room service, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicant must be the current holder of a retail dealer license, or a retail consumption dealer license; provided, however, the applicant may only qualify for a hotel in-room service for the type of alcoholic beverage for which applicant holds a current license. 
(2)  Applicant shall apply on a form provided by the city specifying the type of in-room service license sought (beer, wine, distilled spirits or any combination thereof) together with any other forms, documentation, or other information required by the city council. 
(3)  A hotel in-room service licensee shall be authorized to deliver alcoholic beverages, either by the package or by the drink, if the hotel holds a valid in-room service license, by a hotel employee to a registered guest's room when such distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of the delivery; provided further, however, such sale shall be evidenced by a signed receipt indicating which guest ordered the alcoholic beverages and showing the identification information for that guest, as well as the identification and quantity of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine actually delivered. 
(4)  All hotels having in-room service shall comply with all requirements promulgated by the department of revenue of the state dealing with storage of alcoholic beverages and records required to be maintained in order to provide hotel in-room service. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by hotel guests in quantities otherwise permitted by O.C.G.A. title 3. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-6)) 
Sec. 4-8. - Hours of sale. 
The following hours of sale are hereby established for the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine: 
(1)  Licensed retailers shall not sell distilled spirits in the package for hotel in-room service at any time on Sundays or on any other day during the hours of 2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Licensed retailers shall not sell wine or malt beverages in the package for consumption off the premises or hotel in-room service, at any time on Sunday or on any other day between the hours of 2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Licensed retailers shall not sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine sold for consumption on the premises, on any day of the week between the hours of 2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday before 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-7); Amend. of 1-7-2019) 
State Law reference— Sales on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-9. - Employment of minors restricted. 
(a)  No licensee hereunder shall employ any minor in his establishment; provided, however, that in hotels, motels, and restaurants as defined herein, minors 18 years of age or below may be employed where their duties are not in any way involved with the preparation of, taking orders for, selling, or the service of any alcoholic beverages, provided that musicians and other entertainers 18 years of age or below may provide professional entertainment in the licensed premises with permission of the city administrator. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-24)) 
Sec. 4-10. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
No retailer shall purchase for use at a licensed place of business, any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed by the state. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-29)) 
Sec. 4-11. - Wholesale license application; use of licensed vehicle for delivery, etc. 
Any person, firm or corporation located in the city, desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine in the city shall make application to the city council for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing, the forms authorized and prescribed by the council. No alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-34)) 
Sec. 4-12. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to fail, in a timely manner, to file any report required pursuant to this chapter or to fail to timely and properly remit all taxes due with any such report. Such licensee may be required to appear before the city council to show cause why such licensee's license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  Any licensee who fails in a timely manner to file any report required pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed a penalty and interest in the amount hereinafter provided: 
(1)  When any person required to file a report as provided by this chapter fails to file the report within the time prescribed, he shall be assessed a penalty of $100.00 or ten percent of the tax due, whichever is greater, for each failure to file. 
(2)  In the event the finance director determines, upon inspection of the invoices, books, and records of a licensed dealer or from any other information obtained by him or his authorized agents, that the licensed dealer has not paid the proper tax or the proper amount of taxes, the dealer shall be assessed for the taxes due. After assessment, the person assessed shall be provided with notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided for in section 4-51. 
(3)  When any person willfully fails to pay any tax due as provided by this chapter, the person shall be assessed a penalty the same as that provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
(4)  When any person willfully fails to file a return, files a false or fraudulent return, or when a tax deficiency or any part of a tax deficiency is due to a fraudulent intent to evade any tax imposed or authorized by this chapter, the person shall be assessed a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due. 
(5)  When any person fails to pay the tax or any part of the tax due as provided by this chapter, the person shall pay interest on the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month from the time the tax became due until paid or at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, whichever is greater. Interest shall be computed on a monthly basis for any portion of a month during which payment is delinquent. 
(6)  All penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall be payable to and collected by the city administrator in the same manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-35)) 
Secs. 4-13—4-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL LICENSES 

Sec. 4-34. - Required for sale or possession for sale and possession for consumption on premises. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine when such person does not hold a valid license issued by the city and the state to sell, or possess for sale, such items. It shall also be a violation of this article for any business required to purchase a business license under this chapter to permit any person to consume alcoholic beverages of any kind on the premises of such business without first securing an alcoholic beverage license as provided for herein. 
(b)  Subject to the exceptions as hereinafter set forth, it shall be unlawful for a person, business, establishment, or employee thereof, which imposes, collects, or charges any admission charge, ticket charge, entertainment fee, cover charge, setup or mixer charge or contribution and which is not licensed under this chapter for on-premises consumption to permit any container of alcoholic beverages to be possessed or consumed by any guest, patron, or customer while on such premises. It is the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit the operation of bottle clubs and brown bagging establishments which do not obtain and hold a valid on-premises consumption license. 
(c)  Such prohibition shall not, however, apply to activities or events sponsored or conducted by bona fide nonprofit civic or service organizations on an occasional basis which has been licensed by the state. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-8)) 
Sec. 4-35. - Application on form prescribed by city council. 
Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application therefor on a form to be furnished by the city, and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits and other supporting data as required thereby. Any knowingly untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information contained in any such application shall be cause for denial or suspension, and if a license has been granted, shall be cause for revocation of the same. Each application shall be filed together with a certified check or cashier's check in payment of the license fee, and if an initial application, the investigation fee required by section 4-38. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Where the owner of such business is an individual (a natural person), the application shall be made in that name and the complete address of the applicant shall be listed. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a domestic corporation lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the state, or any foreign corporation lawfully registered under the laws of the state to do business in the state, the applicant may be permitted to apply for such license in the name of the corporation as registered in the office of the secretary of state. The applicant shall provide the licensing officer with the name of its agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state and also provide the licensing officer with the address of its registered office. 
(3)  The written application for a license on file in the city shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current with correct information at all times. The failure to maintain a current license application shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(4)  The council may, in the exercise of its discretion, require a personnel statement as to any employee or agent of an applicant for licensing purposes. 
(5)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a felony of the owner, agent or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a misdemeanor of the owner, agent or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, in any form, gambling or tax law violations. 
(7)  The license application shall list the names of any persons having financial interest in the operation of a proposed licensed premises or control over or ownership interest in such proposed licensed premises. Such persons must meet the same requirements as set forth in this article for the licensee. 
(8)  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, and the location thereof. 
(9)  If the proposed licensed premises is not in existence or requires substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and working drawings showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises and the construction proposed to be carried out by the applicant and the anticipated time for completion of said construction or renovation. 
(10)  As a prerequisite to the issuance to any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant or any managing officer. Upon written recommendation of the city administrator this requirement may be waived by the license officer. 
(11)  Such other information as the city administrator under the direction of the city council may require. 
(12)  The application submitted shall include three references. These references shall not be relatives or current or future employees of the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-9)) 
Sec. 4-36. - Consideration for a license. 
(a)  In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of this article, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, and mental capacity to conduct this business, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he has resided, and whether or not applicant is likely to maintain the operation of the business for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws; 
(2)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(3)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as it pertains to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business; and 
(4)  Whether a person has previously had a similar license suspended or revoked and the reason therefor. 
(b)  The city council shall also give consideration to such other factors as may affect the health and general welfare of the incorporated area of the city, to include the type of license applied for, the effect that license will have on schools, public parks and churches in the area, the effect the granting of the license will have on existing land uses in the area, the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for the particular use sought, and the congestion of roads and streets. These items shall receive reasonable consideration with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, and sustaining the stability of neighborhood property values. 
(c)  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the city council that such license or application fails to meet any of the factors or requirements of subsection (b) of this section or, in any case where such a decision was made because of the undesirability of the location itself, no application can be made until at least one year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
(d)  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the city council that such licensee or applicant fails to meet the requirements of subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section or in any case where such a decision was made because of the ineligibility of the applicant to receive or the licensee to retain an alcoholic beverage license, that applicant or former licensee may not apply for an alcoholic beverage license in the city until at least one year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-10)) 
Sec. 4-37. - Persons prohibited from holding licenses. 
Licenses shall not be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is an illegal alien. 
(2)  A person who has, in the state or any other jurisdiction, been convicted of a misdemeanor or a violation of a municipal or county ordinance involving driving under the influence of intoxicants or drugs, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge of the same within the preceding two years. 
(3)  A person who has, in the state or any other jurisdiction, been convicted of a felony, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any charge of the same within the preceding five years. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted or pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond for a violation of a law or ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages or the sale or possession of a controlled substance within the preceding five years. 
(5)  A partnership, unless all partners qualify. 
(6)  A person whose place of business is managed, operated or owned by a person who could not acquire a license hereunder, except as to the residence requirements herein above provided. 
(7)  Any person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine has been revoked by any licensing authority, during the immediately preceding five years. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-11)) 
Sec. 4-38. - Processing application. 
(a)  All applications filed with the license officer after investigation of the fitness of the applicant and the proposed location shall be approved or disapproved by the city council at a public meeting. In cases where applications are disapproved, the city clerk shall return the amount of the fee submitted with the application to the applicant (excluding, in the case of a new application, the investigative fee). In cases where such applications are approved by the council, the council shall issue a proper license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the particular business and at the particular location applied for. All new license applications shall, in addition to the license fee, include a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $250.00 to cover the cost of the investigation into whether or not applicant should be granted the license applied for. 
(b)  Copies of each application received shall be forwarded to the following offices: 
(l)  Building inspector's office; 
(2)  Planning and zoning director; and 
(3)  If a hotel, motel restaurant, lounge, or private club, to the county health department for their recommendations. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing on the application for the license shall be published once a week for two weeks in the official newspaper of the city wherein legal advertisement are published. After the application is complete and all information is received by the license officer, a public hearing will be scheduled on the application by the council. In addition, if the proposed location does not have an existing license, a sign shall be posted by the license officer on premises at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  The city council shall have full power to determine whether the applicant for a license under the provisions of this article is a fit and proper person to operate the type of business involved, and whether the location of such business is proper and in the best interest of the city, and the city council's determination of these requirements shall be final, except where a right of appeal exists under applicable law. 
(e)  An approved application for an alcohol license by the city council shall be temporary in nature until the applicant receives a valid state license. The license shall become permanent until the noted expiration when the applicant provides the city with a copy of the valid state license. In the event the license is denied by the state or a copy of the state license is not submitted to the city within 45 days of city council approval, the city alcohol license shall become void immediately. 
(f)  All decisions denying, suspending, or revoking such license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally within 30 days from such decision. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-12)) 
Sec. 4-39. - Initial license. 
(a)  Before an initial license shall be issued to the applicant, the applicant must file a complete application which shall include a valid state application with all the questions answered. 
(b)  All persons making an application for an initial license shall be notified of the requirement to attend the hearing on such application and to answer such questions and provide such information as the city council deems necessary and proper. If the applicant fails to appear at such hearings, the application shall be deferred to the next meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the next meeting, the application shall be treated as having been withdrawn. 
(c)  If the application is filed prior to July 1 of a particular license year, the full license fee shall be paid. If the application is filed after July 1, the license fee shall be one-half of the amount of the normal license fee charged for the entire year. The investigation fee shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-13)) 
Sec. 4-40. - Fee scale. 
Before such license shall be granted, the applicant shall pay a regulatory fee in accordance with the following scale: 
(1)  Wholesale dealers of distilled spirits, having a place of business located in the city; $1,500.00 per year. 
(2)  Wholesale dealers of wine, having a place of business located in the city; $1,500.00 per year. 
(3)  Wholesale dealers of malt beverages, having a place of business located in the city; $1,500.00 per year. 
(4)  Retail dealers of wine and malt beverages in the original package, not to be consumed on premises at the same location where the wine may be unchilled, chilled, iced or refrigerated; $1,500.00 per year. 
(5)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits where the same is sold by the drink to be consumed on the premises; $1,500.00 per year. 
(6)  Retail dealers of wine and malt beverages where the same is sold by the drink to be consumed on the premises; $1,500.00 per year. 
(7)  A combination retail dealer license to sell distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, where the same is sold by the drink to be consumed on the premises; $2,500.00 per year. 
(8)  The manufacturer of alcoholic beverages whose plant is located in the city; $3,500.00 per year. 
(9)  Hotel in-room service licensees shall pay an additional license fee in an amount equal to the fee charged to a licensed retailer for each type of alcoholic beverage served. 
(10)  Nonprofit private clubs who sell distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the premises; $550.00 per year. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-14)) 
Sec. 4-41. - Expiration; renewal. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each license year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file the alcohol license renewal application, together with the requisite fee, with the city administrator on the form provided for renewal of a license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before November 1 of each year, otherwise no license, except for cause as approved by mayor and council, shall be renewed. If a license is not renewed in a timely manner, the application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of license to the same extent as if no previous license had been held. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-15)) 
Sec. 4-42. - Required distance of place of business from school, college campus, a fee simple ownership church, playground, alcohol treatment center, housing authority property. 
No license shall be issued for the sale, either at retail or wholesale, of alcoholic beverages if the sale of such beverages would be unlawful under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, or any other state law. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-16)) 
Sec. 4-43. - Display at place of business. 
The city license shall at all times be displayed in plain view at the licensed premises. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-18)) 
Sec. 4-44. - Transferability. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferred from one location to another. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable from one party to another. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-19)) 
Sec. 4-45. - Refund. 
No fees paid for an alcoholic beverage license shall be refunded, whether partially or in full, once the license is issued. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-20)) 
Sec. 4-46. - License granted only after licensed premises receives a certificate of occupancy. 
No license, other than a provisional license, shall be granted under this article until the business establishment referred to in the license application has been granted a certificate of occupancy by the city. A provisional license will be issued by the city council to the applicant for a location not previously licensed, provided reasonable assurances are given to the city council that the applicant promises, when all work is completed, to willfully comply with this article, the city zoning ordinance and the city building codes. The provisional license for a new location shall not entitle the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages until such time as the necessary work has been inspected and approved by all city or county agencies having jurisdiction thereof, a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city and the applicant has been issued a valid state license. When all necessary approvals have been obtained, the city administrator or the license officer shall issue the license previously applied for and approved by the council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-21)) 
Sec. 4-47. - Consumption on premises and package license. 
A license holder may apply for and obtain both the license for sales in original package except for distilled spirits and for consumption on the premises, but the sale of such items must be in separate establishments having independent entrances. This section shall not apply to hotel in-room service. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-22)) 
Sec. 4-48. - Compliance with applicable laws necessary. 
Each licensee shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and statutes of the state, and all local ordinances, and shall, in addition thereto or in furtherance thereof: 
(1)  Prohibit the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages in automobiles or other vehicles, or anywhere outside of the main building or accessory thereto in which the business of such licensee is operated, except as provided for in section 4-3(e); 
(2)  Keep the licensed premises free and clear of cans, bottles, paper and other debris; 
(3)  Permit no one, other than the holder of the license for a consumption on the premises, except for a hotel, motel or inn, during normal business hours, to carry into any licensed premises any alcoholic beverages in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened; 
(4)  Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4, the holders of license for consumption on the premises shall not knowingly permit the purchaser to carry off the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Not sell to, give away, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverage by any minor as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et. seq., or by any person who is mentally incompetent. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-23)) 
Sec. 4-49. - Revocation hearing. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this article is granted as a mere privilege and not a right. Upon violation of any provision of this article or of any law or regulation of the state relating to alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, the city council, at a regular or specifically called meeting, after reasonable written notice of the pending violations to the license and after said licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard as to the proposed grounds for revocation, may revoke or suspend the license. When a license is revoked or suspended, no portion of the license fee shall be refundable. 
(b)  The city administrator, may temporarily suspend any license involving the sale of alcoholic beverages if the manner of operation poses a serious safety or health hazard, for a period not to exceed 30 days pending a hearing and final action by the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-25)) 
Sec. 4-50. - Denial, suspension or revocation of a license. 
The city council may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license required under this article if: 
(1)  The license application is not filed in good faith or is filed by some person as a subterfuge for any other person. 
(2)  Any applicant for a license or any license under this article willfully fails to comply with any provision of this article or with rules and regulations adopted by the city council. 
(3)  Any person to whom a license has been issued is no longer engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, malt beverages or wine, or no longer qualifies as a licensee under this article. 
(4)  In the event applicants permit the licensed premises to be operated in a disorderly manner so as to constitute a public nuisance, after: 
a.  Applicant has been advised in writing by the city administrator of the unsatisfactory manner in which the business is being operate; and 
b.  After applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure said deficiencies. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-26)) 
Sec. 4-51. - Notice of hearing. 
All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. Within 30 days of any such decision, any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city council regarding a license shall be afforded by a public hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses if requested by such applicant in writing filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the decision from which relief is sought. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-27)) 
Secs. 4-52—4-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION 

Sec. 4-73. - Excise tax on wholesale alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The city by this article pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80, does hereby levy and excise tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages by licensed wholesalers in the amount of $0.22 per liter on a proportionate tax at like rates on any fractional part of a liter on distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages (i.e., spirituous liquors), excluding fortified wine. 
(b)  Every licensed wholesaler shall file a monthly report with the city administrator on a form prescribed by the city council, which form shall set forth the total quantity of distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages sold during such month, and shall have attached to it legible copies of all invoices covering said sales. Such monthly report shall be filed no later than the 15th day of the next month following the month of sale. The report shall be accompanied by a local check or cashier's check in the full amount of the tax due. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed a penalty equal to ten percent of the taxes due on each licensed wholesaler who fails to file a timely report and pay the tax due. If the city administrator, with the concurrence of the city attorney, determines that the tax deficiency or any part thereof is due to fraud with intent to evade the tax, the city council may assess a penalty equal to 50 percent of the tax assessed. The failure to pay the tax provided for in this section shall constitute sufficient cause for the revocation of any license issued under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-30)) 
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-81. 
Sec. 4-74. - Excise tax on distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  The city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130, does hereby levy an excess tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink at a rate equal to three percent of charge made by the licensed dealer to the public for the beverage sold. The tax levied by this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(b)  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed retail dealer of distilled spirits by the drink. The tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city administrator containing such information as may be required by the city administrator in order to calculate the tax due. 
(c)  The failure to file the report or pay the tax shall subject licensed consumption dealer to a penalty comparable to that set out in section 4-73(c). 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-31)) 
Sec. 4-75. - Excise tax on malt beverages. 
(a)  The city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(1) does hereby levy an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, which is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, at a rate equal to $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons on a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(b)  The city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(2) does hereby levy an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages, sold in bottles, cans and other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, at a rate equal to five cents per 12 ounces and proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-32)) 
State Law reference— When wholesaler to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81. 
Sec. 4-76. - Per liter tax on wine. 
There is hereby levied and imposed by the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 on the first sale or use of wine by the package, an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter or a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. The manner of imposition, payment and collection of this tax shall be the same as set out in section 4-73, dealing with distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1985, § 9-200(9-33)) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Domesticated farm animals. 
Domesticated farm animals shall not be permitted to be kept in the city. These shall include, but not be limited to, the equine family, cows and other members of the bovine family, the goat family, pigs, sheep and lambs, poultry (chickens, bantams, guinea hens, quail, turkeys, peacocks, emus, and other such fowl from that family). 
Chapter 8 - BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Standards adopted. 
The following standards are hereby adopted by reference: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition. 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition. 
(11)  NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition. 
State Law reference— State building codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 10-19. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy for the city council in any general or special election shall be three percent of the candidate's annual salary for the office of city councilmember, which fee shall be paid to the municipal superintendent at the time of filing such notice of candidacy. The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy for the office of mayor in any general or special election shall be three percent of the candidate's annual salary for the office of mayor, which fee shall be paid to the municipal superintendent at the time of filing such notice of candidacy. 
(Code 1985, § 2-302) 
State Law reference— Candidate qualification fee, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Secs. 10-20—10-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VOTING 

Sec. 10-42. - Election districts. 
The area comprising the corporate limits of the city, as the same is now or shall hereafter exist, shall constitute the sole election district of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-402) 
Sec. 10-43. - Polling places. 
The polling place within the city shall be the city hall. 
(Code 1985, § 2-403) 
Sec. 10-44. - Date of election. 
See O.C.G.A. § 32-3-9. 
(Code 1985, § 2-404) 
Sec. 10-45. - Write-in votes. 
Write-in votes shall be permitted in municipal elections. 
(Code 1985, § 2-405) 
Sec. 10-46. - Absentee ballots. 
See O.C.G.A. § 32-2-280. 
(Code 1985, § 2-406) 
Sec. 10-47. - Contested elections. 
See O.C.G.A. § 21-2-520 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 2-408) 
Secs. 10-48—10-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPEACHMENT AND REMOVAL 
(RESERVED) 

Secs. 10-68—10-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-93. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days. 
See O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Code 1985, § 2-601) 
Secs. 10-94—10-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOTER REGISTRATION 
(RESERVED) [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Voter registration, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq. 

Secs. 10-115—10-134. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Short title and purpose. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
a.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illnesses; or 
b.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adaptors, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. 
(2)  Establishment of wellhead protection zone. There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 500 feet. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
a.  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less than provided by the current subdivision regulations for the city. 
b.  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under subsection (3) of this section: 
a.  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides. 
b.  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto. 
c.  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, streets, driveways, and walks serving buildings permitted under subsection (3) of this section. 
d.  Sanitary landfills. 
e.  Hazardous waste disposal sites. 
f.  Stormwater infiltration basins. 
g.  Underground storage tanks. 
h.  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(5)  Administration. The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement, and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1985, § 7-114; Ord. of 10-2-1995) 
Secs. 12-2—12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-21. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions originate to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bone, coal or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatin manufacture; 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse; 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
(20)  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture; 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(22)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(23)  Soap manufacture; 
(24)  Stockyards; 
(25)  Sulphuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(26)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins; 
(27)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(28)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; and/or 
(29)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 1985, § 6-201) 
Sec. 12-22. - Open burning. 
(a)  In general. Open burning shall be allowed as provided in subsection (b) of this section in accordance with EPD rules and regulations. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for the same upon notice by the state forestry department. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the state forestry department, all open burning shall be discontinued and no permits will be issued. 
(b)  Open burning permits. 
(1)  No open burning will be allowed unless permit is obtained prior to commencing the burn. 
(2)  Open burning permits shall be obtained from the state forestry department. 
(c)  Enforcement. The enforcement of burn permits will be at the discretion of the state forestry department. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates a burn permit issued by the state forestry department will be subject to penalties issued by the state forestry department. Upon recommendation by the state forestry department, an individual found to be in violation of a burn permit may be subject to municipal court. 
(2)  Persons found to be illegally burning without a burn permit will be subject to penalties by the state forestry department and upon recommendation by state forestry department may be subject to municipal court. 
(Code 1985, § 6-202) 
Sec. 12-23. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1985, § 6-203) 
Secs. 12-24—12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 

Sec. 12-50. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this article is to: 
(1)  Recognize trees to be a valuable asset providing a healthier and more beautiful environment in which to live; 
(2)  Recognize that trees are economically beneficial in attracting new residents, providing shade and cooling effects as well as preventing noise and pollution; 
(3)  Recognize that trees also prevent erosion and assist in flood control; 
(4)  Establish standards limiting the removal of, and ensuring the replacement of trees sufficient to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment necessary to a healthy, happy community; 
(5)  Not be punitive or to cause hardship to any individual, private or public company that uses care and diligence to protect trees within the city; 
(6)  Not affect private property of any sort except in the situation of public safety; 
(7)  Not affect new development projects in the private sector. 
(Code 1985, § 6-601) 
Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees means trees and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of the streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-602) 
Sec. 12-52. - Creation and establishment of a city tree board. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. Two of the members will include representation from the county extension office and/or a certified horticulturist or arborist and representation from the city's street department. The remaining members will be property or business owners in the city. 
(1)  Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(2)  Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  Duties and responsibilities. 
a.  The city tree board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and council on matters relating to the implementation of this article and to tree management in the city, including appropriate funding mechanisms. 
b.  The city tree board shall use its best efforts to inventory the condition and major-maintenance needs of all street trees in the city, making recommendations to mayor and council. Maintenance recommendations shall be in accordance to species-specific standards issued by the county extension agent, International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), or forestry service. Recommendations shall include, but need not be limited to, structural pruning as necessary to maintain public safety and to sustain the health, safety and natural growth habit of the tree; routine adjustment and timely removal of stakes, ties, tree guards and tree grates; watering sufficient to ensure the establishment and survival of a tree; fertilizing as needed; pest and disease management procedures as needed and in a manner consistent with public health and ecological diversity; and replacement of missing or damaged trees. 
c.  The city tree board shall meet every six months or as deemed necessary by the nature of business being conducted by the board. 
(4)  Operation. The city tree board shall choose its own officers, develop its own bylaws (to be approved by city council), and keep a journal of its proceedings. All tree board records will be kept on file with the city. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(1—4)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The list of recommended trees listed as attachment 1 to the ordinance from which this article is derived constitutes the official street tree recommended species for the city. All street trees must be approved by the city tree board prior to being planted if they are not included on this list. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(5)) 
Sec. 12-54. - Spacing; distance from curb and sidewalk; distance from street corners and fireplug; utilities. 
All planting will be in accordance with department of transportation regulations and follow acceptable spacing guidelines as suggested by the ISA publication standards and county extension service office. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(6)) 
Sec. 12-55. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. Trees removed on city property must be replaced, if feasible, at proper tree planting times as determined by recommendation of the city tree board. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. Said property owners must plant according to the list of recommended trees listed as attachment 1 to the ordinance from which this article is derived and have approval from the city tree board prior to planting. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(7)) 
Sec. 12-56. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or their obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city tree board. Severely topped trees may be removed to prevent future hazards. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(8)) 
Sec. 12-57. - Pruning and corner clearance. 
(a)  For reasons of public safety, every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp, obstruct the view of any street intersection, or obstruct pedestrian's ability to use the city's sidewalks. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, and/or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune or remove any tree or other woody vegetation on private property when it interferes with issues pertaining to public safety. 
(b)  Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. All utility pruning shall follow current ISA guidelines. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(9)) 
Sec. 12-58. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
For reasons of public safety, the owner shall cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owner of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and file a lien against the property for the cost of removal. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(10)) 
Sec. 12-59. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of city trees and park trees shall be ground to a minimum depth of eight inches below ground level, and all stump debris removed and replaced with similar-type soil fill. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(11)) 
Sec. 12-60. - Interference with city tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while conducting business in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(12)) 
Sec. 12-61. - Review by council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303(13)) 
Chapter 14 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 14-19. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as provided in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-401; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(Code 1985, § 6-402; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-21. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to flood, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1985, § 6-403; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-22. - Objectives. 
The objectives if this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health. 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in floodplains. 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. 
(7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1985, § 6-404; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone VI-30, VE or V. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures; mining, filling, grading, paving, excavating, and drilling operations or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance or standard, based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance or standard, based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map of a community issued by FEMA where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) (i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction). The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Mangrove stand means an assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (avicennia nitida); red mangrove (rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (longuncluaria racemosa); and buttonwood (conocarpus erecta). 
Manufactured home means a building transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages for the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. The term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard. The term "new construction" also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Sand dunes means a naturally occurring accumulation of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act P.L. 97-348) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of street and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building taking place during the life of a building in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
a.  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. This is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1985, § 6-405; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-24. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its flood insurance study, dated December 1, 1983, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(c)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, or extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(e)  Establishment of development. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 6-406; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-25. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of local administration. The county builder inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the county building inspector on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities and may include, but is not limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 14-26(b); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result or proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the county building inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The county building inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the county building inspector. Duties of the county building inspector shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(4)  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings. 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-26(b). 
(7)  In coastal high hazard areas certification shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the building is designed and securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash. 
(8)  In coastal high hazard areas, the county building inspector shall review plans for adequacy of breakaway walls. 
(9)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the county building inspector shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(10)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the county building inspector shall make the necessary interpretations. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(11)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-24(b), then the county building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provision of section 14-26. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the county building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals, as established by the city council, shall hear and decide appeals and requests of variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the county building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided by law. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition in section 14-23) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  In passing upon such applications, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(6)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(7)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(8)  Condition for variance. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon the following: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The county building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Code 1985, § 6-407; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 14-26. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 14-24(b) or 14-25(c)(11), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 14-25(b)(2). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in extensions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3.  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsections (b)(4)b.1 and (b)(4)b.3 of this section. 
c.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
2.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (b)(4) or (5) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 
(5)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-24(b), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If section subsection (b)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subsection. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsection (b)(1) of this section and the encroachment standards are met. 
(6)  Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-24(b) are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave wash, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  All buildings or structures shall be located 25 feet landward of the reach of the mean high tide. 
b.  All building or structures shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located not lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water. Open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action. 
c.  All buildings or structures shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns. 
d.  All pile and column foundations and structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values shall equal or exceed the base flood. Wind loading values shall equal or exceed the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the state building code, latest edition. 
e.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in this article. 
f.  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The county building inspector shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
1.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction. 
2.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties. 
3.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
g.  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which would increase potential flood damage. 
h.  Lattice work or decorative screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation, provided they are not part of the structural support of the building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used; and provided the following design specifications are met: 
1.  No solid walls shall be allowed; and 
2.  Material shall consist of wood or mesh screening only. 
i.  If aesthetic lattice works or screening are utilized, such enclosed space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
j.  Prior to construction, plans for any building that will have lattice work or decorative screening must be submitted to the county building inspector for approval. 
k.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with lattice work or decorative screening. 
l.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards and the elevation standards of are met. 
(c)  Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-24(b), where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-25(c)(11). 
(d)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-24(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Code 1985, § 6-408; Ord. of 8-2-1993) 
Chapter 16 - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State cable television franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-19. - Franchise granted and limitations. 
The franchise to be granted by the city pursuant to this article shall grant to the grantee the right, privilege and franchise to erect, construct, operate, and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all such extensions thereto and addition thereto in the city; and poles, wires, cables underground, conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of the CATV system for the interception, sale, transmission, and distribution of television programs and other audiovisual electrical signals and the right to transmit the same to the inhabitants of the city on the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. The city expressly reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. It is further the intention of this article to limit the authorized activity of a grantee hereunder solely to the operation of cable television systems within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-401; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-20. - Duration of franchise grant. 
The term of the franchise to be granted by the city pursuant to this article shall be for a period of ten years from and after the grant and acceptance date of the franchise to be awarded, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided, and further provided that the mayor and city council shall have the right to review such franchise periodically at such time as the mayor and city council may from time to time elect to do so and as hereinafter provided. Provided further, this franchise will be extended for an additional five-year period unless the city can show cause why such shall not be done. 
(Code 1985, § 4-402; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-21. - Franchise right subject to police powers. 
In accepting this franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. 
(Code 1985, § 4-403; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-22. - Franchise required; duration; exclusivity. 
(a)  The city shall grant a franchise for the use of the streets within the city for the construction, operation, and maintenance of a CATV system. No system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city or be allowed to operate without a CATV franchise. 
(b)  The franchise shall be granted for a term of ten years, subject to a five-year extension as stated in section 16-20. Thereafter, after full public hearings, and according to the franchise renewal procedure that follows, the franchise may be renewed for periods of reasonable duration not to exceed ten years as, in the opinion of the city council, will serve the public interest, plus an additional five years extension under the provisions of section 16-20. The franchise to operate a cable television service shall be on a nonexclusive basis. 
(Code 1985, § 4-404; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access cablecasting services means provided by a cable television system on its public, education, or leased channels. Types of cable casting service include: 
(1)  Public access channel. A specially-designated noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come nondiscriminatory basis for which the system shall maintain, and have available for public use, at least the minimal equipment and facilities necessary for the production of programming for such a channel. 
(2)  Education access channel. A specially designated channel for use by local education authorities. 
(3)  Leased access channel. A portion of the system's nonbroadcast bandwidth, including the unused portion of the specially-designated channels for leased access services. 
Additional services means any of the following: such video services as the transmission of all leased access channel signals not included in basic subscriber service, as well as the transmission of cablecast video advertising messages and pay television signals. 
Cablecasting programming (exclusive of broadcast signals) means carried on a cable television system. 
Cable communication system, cable system, CATV or system means a system of other conductors and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, and any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air. 
Certificate holder means the person or company awarded a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of a CATV system in the city, the certificate to be awarded in accordance with the provisions of applicable law, including this article. 
City means the City of Woodbine, Georgia, and all territory within its existing and future territorial corporate limits. The city officer or employee designated in this article shall mean the person elected to or appointed to such position. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
Franchise shall include this franchise and all rights, power, and privileges thereunder. 
Franchise agreement means the agreement between the city and the franchises made pursuant to this article. All provisions of this article, as amended, are part of the franchise agreement. 
Franchisee means the entity to whom the CATV franchise is awarded and shall include all persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities, or obligations under this franchise agreement, and also all persons having or claiming any title or interest in or to the system, whether by reason of the franchise itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, hypothecations, security, agreement, management, or operating agreement, or otherwise arising or created. 
Gross subscriber revenues means those revenues derived from the supplying of regular subscriber service within the city, including monthly service charges and fees for regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels if any; it also includes installation fees or reconnect charges, revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, or any other income derived from the system. 
Origination cablecasting programming (exclusive of broadcast signals) means carried on a cable television system over one or more channels, and subject to the exclusive control of the cable operation. 
Pay TV means an arrangement under which a charge is made to a subscriber for receiving a particular television program or series of programs. 
Programmer means any person, firm, corporation, or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system. 
Public agency means an agency which is supported wholly, or substantially, by public funds. 
Service, basic, and additional basic subscriber service means the total of all of the following: 
(1)  The transmission of all broadcast video channel signals provided for herein; 
(2)  The transmission of the public and educational access channel signals; 
(3)  The transmission of the local origination channel signals; 
(4)  The transmission of such other cable cast channel signals as are required by the Federal Communication Commission to match the number of broadcast channel signals being transmitted; and 
(5)  The installation and re-connection of subscriber service outlets. 
Streets and highways means streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers, alleys, all other public rights-of-way and public grounds or waters within or belonging to the city. 
Subscriber means a person or organization whose premises are physically wired to receive, and/or who is receiving by any manner, any transmission from the system. 
Subscriber service drop means such extension wiring from the franchisee's distribution lines to a subscriber's building. 
User means a person utilizing a system channel as a producer, for purposes of production of or transmission of material, or as a subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material. 
(Code 1985, § 4-405; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-24. - Acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  This franchise and the rights, privileges, and authority hereby granted shall take effect and be in force from and after acceptance by the franchisee of a franchise offered by the city, subject to the terms of this article and the rules and regulations of the FCC and/or its successor agency, for a period of ten years, plus a five-year extension under the provisions of section 16-20. The franchisee must, within 30 days after being offered this franchise by the city, unconditionally accept such franchise and agree to comply with and abide by all the provisions of this article, as amended. Such acceptance and agreement shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. The franchise contract is made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Should the grantee fail to comply with subsection (a) of this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority under this franchise whatever. 
(c)  The franchisee shall have the option to request a renewal of its franchise for an additional term of ten years. Should the franchisee desire to exercise this option, it shall notify the city in writing not more than two years and no less than six months prior to expiration of the current term of the franchise. Upon receiving a request to renew the franchise form from the franchisee, the city shall, after notice to the franchisee and all parties concerned, conduct a public hearing on the request. After hearing all the evidence and securing all the information the mayor and council deems necessary, the mayor and council shall make a decision as to whether or not the franchise will be renewed and/or other appropriate action to take; provided, however, the city may appoint in the manner provided for in section 16-54, a CATV advisory board to review the performance of the franchisee and the intent of this article. If appointed, the board will comply with the following procedure for franchise renewal: 
(1)  At least 30 days' public notice shall be given of a meeting of the board being held to determine whether the operator has satisfactorily performed his obligations under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the board shall look at the technical developments and performance of the system, programming, other services offered, cost of service, and any other particular requirement set forth in the ordinance, such as the availability of programming equipment and personnel to aid access channel users; also, the board shall consider the franchisee's annual reports made to the city of the FCC; provisions shall be made for community comment, and industry performance on a national basis shall be considered. 
(2)  The board will have four months, after being assigned the duty, to determine the franchisee's eligibility for renewal. 
(3)  The board shall prepare amendments to determine the franchise ordinance that it believes necessary. 
(4)  The board shall submit to the mayor and city council recommendations in regard to renewal of the franchise, changes to the franchise, and amendments to the franchise ordinance. 
(5)  If the mayor and city council finds the franchisee's performance satisfactory, a new franchise may be granted pursuant to the ordinance as amended. 
(6)  In the event the current franchisee is determined by the city council to have performed unsatisfactorily, new applicants shall be sought and evaluated by the CATV advisory board and a franchise award made by the mayor and city council according to the CATV franchising procedures adopted by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-406; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-25. - Use of existing poles. 
The poles used for the franchisee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the Camden Telephone Company and Okefenokee EMC/or Georgia Power Company, or any other public utility, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by the Camden Telephone Company and Okefenokee EMC/or Georgia Power Company, or any other public utility, is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies following a good-faith effort on the part of the franchisee to obtain such agreements, the franchisee is to erect and maintain its own poles (no pole will exceed 30 feet), as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system. The location and physical characteristics of the poles must be approved by the city public works director and the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-407; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-26. - Poles and wires not to interfere with city use of streets. 
(a)  The franchisee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or the use of city streets, or to interfere with existing and/or new improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property by the city and its citizens. The franchisee will, at the request of the city, move and relocate, if necessary, any of the franchisee's installation, including removal of poles to avoid such interference at the franchisee's expense. The city is the sole judge as to what constitutes interference. Approval of all construction sites and routes must be secured from the city public works director and the mayor and city council prior to re-erection of any transmission or distribution facilities. Any change in the location of these facilities shall also be subject to prior approval by the city public works director and the mayor and city council. Construction and maintenance of the transmission and/or distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Safety Code, as amended, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electric Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, as amended, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any private party holding on appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of the same shall be paid by the requesting party. 
(c)  Installation and house drop hardware shall be uniform throughout the city, except that the franchisee shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the state of the art progresses. This provision will not require the franchisee to modify any installation already made unless other changes in the system made by the franchisee cause inferior reception in the areas already installed. 
(d)  In those areas where telephone and electric service lines are underground, or where the franchisee is unable to make arrangements for the use of existing utility poles, the franchisee shall place its cables and service lines underground unless approval to place the cable and service lines on poles is secured from the mayor and city council. The franchisee is authorized to place all cables and service lines underground in areas where poles are located. 
(Code 1985, § 4-408; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-27. - Repair of damage to city property. 
(a)  In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the franchisee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the franchisee in the course of its operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission to do so from the city administrator or his representative, and the proper state and/or federal official if a state and/or federal highway is involved. All such work shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights. 
(b)  All work in any way necessitated by the business of the franchisee which may involve the opening, breaking up or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk or other part of any city-owned or city-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the city public works director, and may be done by the city at the expense of the franchisee, if mutually agreed upon by the city and the franchisee or by the city and charged to the franchisee if the franchisee refuses to repair the streets, sidewalks or city property promptly and/or fails to repair such in a satisfactory manner. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall grant to the franchisee any right of property in city-owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than, in the city's judgment, its own business or needs may require. 
(Code 1985, § 4-409; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-28. - CATV not to interfere with existing reception. 
Installations shall be maintained so as not to interfere with TV reception already in existence. 
(Code 1985, § 4-410; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-29. - Description of system. 
(a)  The system authorized by this article shall be capable of providing at least 20 channels and four designated access channels, and shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the latest technical standards of the FCC. Provided further, if the system has the capacity, additional channels must be provided when existing access channels are in use 80 percent of the time during any consecutive three-hour period of six consecutive weeks. 
(b)  The franchisee shall have and maintain a sufficient supply of materials at its location office to ensure proper maintenance and repair within a reasonable period of time. 
(c)  The franchisee will maintain an office in the city which will be adequately staffed and be open five days a week (except holidays); unless the city later determines that more days of operation are necessary. The franchisee shall have a 24-hour telephone answering service in the city. The franchisee shall designate one person in the city office who has authority to act for the franchisee in all matters that arise during the operation of the franchise. 
(Code 1985, § 4-411; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-30. - Technical standards. 
Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver. During the terms of this franchise, the franchisee shall furnish to all persons desiring the service offered (subject only to the specifications of this article) and paying for the same, a wire service capable of producing as good a quality of television picture or reception as may be practicable from time to time, and essentially, of the same quality as received at the antenna site. The franchisee shall make all reasonable and practicable betterment of said services as improvements in the carrying of television signals and in the elimination of objectionable radio interferences as the state of the art shall warrant. 
(Code 1985, § 4-412; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-31. - Subscriber rates. 
(a)  Rates and charges. The rates and charges made to subscribers hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet all costs of service (assuming efficient and economical management), including a fair return on the original cost, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to the rendering of such service (without regard to any subsequent sale or transfer price or cost of such properties). This standard shall control the city council's decisions dealing with increases and reductions in rates. 
(b)  Fee increases. The franchisee may, no more often than once every 12 months, petition the city for an increase in fees, setting forth the proposed fee increase and the reasons therefor. The city shall, upon receipt of such petition, hold a full public hearing before the council on said petition, said hearing to be held not more than 90 days after the petition is filed. At such hearing, all interested parties may present evidence in support of or in opposition to the proposed fee increase. The franchisee shall have the burden of proving the need for any increase in fees. The city shall then have 90 days to either approve or disapprove said petition in whole or in part, and shall give their reasons therefor. The franchisee will furnish all records considered necessary by the city to reach a decision in this matter. 
(c)  Rate filing. The franchisee will file a set of rates annually (every 12 months the franchise is in effect) for approval and/or disapproval by the city council. 
(d)  Rate limitation. The rates and charges shall be not more than that set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Interruption of service. 
(1)  In the event that its service to any subscriber is interrupted for 24 consecutive hours, except for acts of God, accidents, vandalism or sabotage caused by persons not affiliated with the franchise, and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, grantee (franchisee) shall provide a ten percent rebate of the monthly fees to affected subscriber. 
(2)  In the event that its service to any subscriber is interrupted for 48 consecutive hours, except for acts of God, accidents, vandalism, or sabotage caused by persons not affiliated with the franchise, and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, grantee shall provide a 20 percent rebate of the monthly fees to affected subscriber. 
(3)  In the event that its service to any subscriber is interrupted for 72 consecutive hours, except for acts of God, accidents, vandalism or sabotage cause by persons not affiliated with the franchise, and except in circumstances for which the prior approval of the interruption is obtained from the city council, grantee shall provide a 50 percent rebate of the monthly fees to affected subscriber. 
(f)  Late charge. The franchisee may, in addition to the rates set out in the franchise agreement, add a late charge of five percent per month on any fee that is not paid within 15 days of receipt of bill. 
(g)  Payment in advance. A franchise may require subscribers to pay for each month of basic service in advance at the beginning of each month. No other advance payment or deposit of any kind shall be required by the franchisee for basic subscriber service. No deposit or advance payment of any kind shall be charged for the provision of any converter without prior approval of the city. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit charges or waiver of charges for initial installation or reconnection. If deposits are authorized, the deposit plus seven percent will be returned to the user at the end of the rental period, less any damage to the rented property other than fair wear and tear or any act of God. 
(h)  Disconnection and installment. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effected until 30 days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge and shall include ten days written notice of the intent to disconnect delivered to the subscriber in question. If a subscriber pays 30 days after payment is due and after notice of disconnection has been given, a franchisee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge, the payment of reconnection charge, a franchisee shall promptly reinstate a subscriber's cable service. 
(Code 1985, § 4-413; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-32. - Commencement of construction. 
The franchisee agrees upon acceptance of this franchise to complete the cable TV system within the corporate limits of the city, as they exist on January 1, 1981, in accordance with the construction schedule filed with and accepted by the city council. The construction schedule is made a part of this article by this reference thereto. The franchisee agrees to extend service to any annexed area which does not contain at least 50 potential subscribers per mile of equipment necessary to serve the area unless state or federal law requires such. If service is not provided to an area due to population scarcity, and it later achieved the necessary population density, then the franchisee shall extend service to that area within one year of the determination of the required density. In the event of the failure of the franchisee to commence construction of the system within 150 days after the acceptance of this article, or in the event of the failure of the franchisee to render significant community cable television service (in this case, the term "significant community cable television service" means 20 percent of the franchise geographic area is receiving cable television service on a regular basis) to the city and the inhabitants thereof, as contemplated and provided for by this article, within a period of six months from the effective date of acceptance of this franchise, the city council may on 90 days' notice to the franchisee, declare this article and the right and franchise granted thereunder forfeited, or require the company to reduce monthly subscriber fees to an amount deemed appropriate by the city, and/or require the franchisee to forfeit the performance bond required by section 16-37. Failure to comply with these terms by reason or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the franchisee and which circumstances could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of its terms by the franchisee and which circumstances could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of its terms by the franchisee shall not be sufficient grounds for the city to declare forfeiture. 
(Code 1985, § 4-414; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-33. - Construction schedule. 
The franchisee shall submit a construction schedule upon the filing of its application which shall reflect the franchisee's plans for the construction of the cable television system. The schedule shall include all times required for obtaining the governmental licenses and permits. If construction is delayed through the fault of parties other than the franchisee, including, but not limited to, the failure of any governmental agency to issue any permit of license within the time projected on the construction schedule, then the remainder of the schedule may be modified, with the city's consent, to reflect this delay. 
(Code 1985, § 4-415; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-34. - Sale or transfer of franchise. 
In the event the franchisee fails to renew its option at the termination of the franchise period, or in the event that the franchise is forfeited due to the failure of the franchisee to fully comply with all terms and conditions of this agreement, or upon transfer or assignment of the franchise, the distribution system of the franchisee shall be placed up for sale at fair market value and the city shall have the first option of refusal on the purchase of the system. The fair market value shall be determined by the city in accordance with generally accepted appraisal and accounting principles. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for good will or any right or privilege granted by this franchise. Should a dispute arise, such shall be settled by arbitration under state law. 
(Code 1985, § 4-416; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-35. - Insurance. 
The franchisee shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the city, at all times during the franchise period and any renewal thereof as a result of the grant of this franchise and from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any workmens' compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within the city, or by any act of the franchisee, its agents or employees arising out of the operations of the franchisee. The franchisee shall carry insurance with a company authorized to do business in the state, to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amounts of such general liability insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than $50,000.00 per occurrence for property damage and $100,000.00 per aggregate for property damage, and not less than $300,000.00 per person for personal injury to or the death of one person and not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. The company shall also carry such insurance on its vehicles in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for each person and $300,000.00 per occurrence. Workers' compensation shall be maintained as required by the laws of the state. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. Said policy of insurance or a certified copy or thereof shall be approved by the city attorney and then deposited with and kept on file by the city clerk. Each policy of insurance shall state therein that the city will be indemnified and saved harmless from and against all losses, damages, actions, court costs, and attorney's fees arising out of action by the franchisee, its officials, employees, agents and contractors in constructing, repairing or maintenance of the TV cable system, and in the operation of the franchise (inside or outside city limits). A certificate showing that such coverage has been obtained and is currently in force and effect shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the commencement of construction by the franchisee and within 30 days of the anniversary date of the policy in each and every year as long as this franchise and any extension thereof is in force. The certificate will state that the insurance carrier will give the city 60 days advance notice of termination of any policy furnished hereunder. Further, franchisee will save harmless and defend the city against copyright and patent infringement matters which arise out of the construction, repair, maintenance, and operation of this franchise. 
(Code 1985, § 4-417; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-36. - Use of poles by city. 
The company hereby grants to the city, free of any expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by the franchisee for any legal municipal purpose insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the franchisee's own wires and fixtures, and the city shall hold the franchisee harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage directly or indirectly caused by the placing of the city's wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the franchisee. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. 
(1)  Complaints. As a condition precedent for the granting of the franchise, both the city and the franchisee shall have adopted a written procedure for resolving complaints involving cable television operations. A copy of said procedure shall be filed with the city administrator. The franchisee shall maintain a business office or agent within the franchise area for the purpose of investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction and similar matters concerning the operation of the cable television system. A record will be made of all complaints received showing the name of the complaining party, the complaint, and the action taken to rectify the complaint. The resolutions of these complaints shall be fair and equitable and shall be subject to review by the city. The office of the city administrator shall have responsibility for administration of this section, and all complaints which cannot be resolved between the user and the franchisee shall be directed to that office for decision. In the event the city administrator determines that the complaints are in such magnitude that such is causing an undue cost to the city, the city administrator shall inform the franchisee, and the franchisee will be charged a reasonable rate for each complaint handled. These complaint procedures shall be made known in writing to all subscribers upon subscription to the system. The city administrator and/or his representative shall have the right to inspect the records and other facilities of the franchisee in order to determine all facts involved in complaints which are brought to his attention. All records shall be kept for five years. 
(2)  Disputes. Should any dispute arise under the provisions of this article, the matter shall be referred by the franchisee in writing to the city administrator. The city administrator will make a decision on the disputes within 30 days from the receipt thereof. The decision of the city administrator is final unless such decision is appealed to the city council of the city within 15 days from the date of receipt thereof. The city council will hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after receipt thereof. The franchisee may appear before the city council and present evidence on its behalf. Each party may cross-examine all witnesses testifying at the hearing. The city council will make a decision on the appeal within 30 days of the hearing. The decision of the city council is final unless such is appealed to the superior court of the county. The franchisee will continue operation during the appeals and court hearing. 
(Code 1985, § 4-418; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-37. - Application fee and bond. 
An application fee of $100.00, nonrefundable, shall be provided by the franchisee before consideration of a proposal. At the time this franchise becomes effective, the franchisee shall furnish a bond to the city in the amount of $100,000.00, in such form with such sureties as shall be acceptable to the city, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all obligations of the franchisee under the terms of this franchise (except such sums as are covered by the insurance provided in section 16-35), and further, the franchisee will furnish a payment bond to the city in the amount of $10,000.00, guaranteeing the payment of all sums which may become due from the franchisee to the city during the first full year of operation. At the discretion of the council, such payment bond will not be required after the first full year of operation. The city council may reinstate requirement for a payment bond at any time they deem it to be necessary. All bonds must be furnished before the franchising contract is signed, and must be approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 4-420; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-38. - Free service to public buildings. 
In consideration of the granting of franchise to the franchisee as aforesaid, the franchisee will furnish, without installation charge or monthly service fee, a single outlet to all public, private and parochial elementary, high schools and secondary schools as well as public buildings and facilities of the city. Major trunk and distribution cables will be routed near these installations, where possible, or where the cable system is in the area, feeder lines will be extended, where required, to a service point outside the school or public buildings. All attachments and outlets to schools and municipal buildings and facilities shall be at the expense of the franchisee, but distribution of the system within these buildings shall be at the expense of the schools or responsible public agencies. It is further understood that service to schools and public building and facilities will be supplied in a logical extension of the system into each area rather than construction specifically serving a school, public building, or similar facility because of the cost and extended time required to build a complete system. 
(Code 1985, § 4-421; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-39. - Franchise fee. 
In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the franchisee, the franchisee shall pay to the city annually, no later than February 20, an amount equal to three percent of gross of all cable subscriber revenues, including, but not limited to, subscriber revenues, advertising, pay cable, and leased channel revenues of the franchisee derived from cable television operations within the city limits during the previous 12 months. Provided further, if the percentage rate is increased by the FCC or its successor, then the fee authorized hereunder may be amended by the city council to the highest fee authorized by the FCC or its successor to regulatory matters, effective as of the date such higher fee is approved by such regulatory agency. In the event the city council shall have the right to inspect the records of the franchisee at any reasonable time for the purpose of ascertaining accurately what the actual gross receipts of the franchisee may have been for cable television service for the past month, months, year and/or for the present year. The city administrator will approve forms on which this report will be made. Such forms are hereby made part of this article. The franchisee will be subject to the same deficiency determination, interest and penalties set forth in the excise tax on alcoholic beverages (section 4-73) for failure to file the required form and pay the fee, or for not paying or for underpayment of the fee due. 
(Code 1985, § 4-422; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-40. - Annual report. 
All installations by the franchisee shall be made in good, substantial, and safe condition and shall be maintained in such condition at all times. The franchisee shall, during each year of this agreement, have prepared by an engineer or an engineering firm qualified in cable communications and approved by the city, an annual performance report which shall be sufficient to ascertain the franchisee's compliance with FCC technical standards and the quality of the franchisee's overall performance. Such report shall summarize all subscribers' complaints and their resolutions, and said report shall be submitted to the city council on or before June 1 of each year. In the event that such report indicates that the franchisee is not providing a quality service consistent with FCC rules or that subscriber complaints are so numerous or unresolved as to indicate a poor quality service, the city council may, upon 90 days written notice to the franchisee, declare this article and the rights and franchise granted thereunder forfeited. 
(Code 1985, § 4-423; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-41. - Annual audit. 
The franchisee shall, during each year of this agreement, have prepared, by a certified public accountant, an annual financial audit which shall be sufficient to ascertain the financial condition of the franchisee. Such audit report shall be submitted to the city council within 90 days after the end of the franchisee's fiscal year. 
(Code 1985, § 4-424; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-42. - Compliance with state, federal, and local regulations. 
The franchisee shall, at all times, be in full compliance with all FCC regulations, as amended, pertaining to cable television systems. The franchisee shall furthermore, at all times, be in full compliance with all existing federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and statutes as are applicable to the operation of a cable television system. No part of this article shall be construed as a waiver of any local, state or federal law, or as a limit of liability. 
(Code 1985, § 4-425; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-43. - Certificate of compliance. 
The franchisee shall file with the FCC an application for a certificate of compliance and/or any and all reports required by said agency and its successors. 
(Code 1985, § 4-426; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-44. - Compliance with FCC regulations. 
(a)  To the extent required by the present rules of the FCC or any other rules or regulations or amendments thereto and until such time as that rule is changed or specific relief therefrom is granted by the FCC, the franchisee shall provide services, system performance, channel capacity, one- or two-way communications, operational policies, etc., in strict conformance of said rules. 
(b)  In any case, where the proposal shall provide for, or promise services, system performance, etc., which exceed the minimum requirements of the FCC, the proposal of the applicant shall be binding and shall be made a part hereof. Under no circumstances, however, shall the proposal of the franchisee contain provision for services, performance, operation, etc., which are prohibited by the rules of the FCC. 
(c)  Section 76.31 of the rules of the FCC, and any amendments thereto, set out certain requirements and provisions that must be contained in this agreement in order for the franchisee to obtain a certificate of compliance from the FCC. It is the knowledge and belief of the city and the franchisee that all the present requirements of those rules are contained herein. Any changes in said rules that may be authorized and ordered by the FCC from time to time shall be incorporated into this agreement within the time period stipulated by the FCC. 
(Code 1985, § 4-427; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-45. - Enforcement. 
Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms of this franchise shall not operate as or constitute a general waiver or relinquishment of any of such terms or conditions but the same shall be and shall remain at all times in full force and effect. 
(Code 1985, § 4-428; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-46. - Subsequent regulation. 
The right is hereby reserved in the city, by ordinance, to adopt in addition to the provisions herein contained and in addition to other existing applicable ordinances, such regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power. In the event the FCC elects not to regulate cable television or partially or totally abandons regulation of cable television, all of the rules and regulations set forth by the FCC at the time this article was first read shall remain in effect until changed by another regulatory agency, state or federal, and/or changed by action of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-429; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-47. - Standby power. 
The cable system operator shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby powering for head end transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two hours. All utility safety regulations must be followed to prevent a standby generator from powering the dead utility line, with possible injury to an unwitting lineman. 
(Code 1985, § 4-430; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-48. - Privacy. 
(a)  Use of data from subscriber. A franchisee shall not initiate or use any form, procedure, or device for procuring information or data from cable subscribers' premises by use of the cable system without prior valid written authorization from each subscriber so affected. Valid authorization means written approval from the subscriber for a period of time not to exceed one year, and said authorization shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as a condition of service. Further, it shall be unlawful for a grantee, without such authorization, to activate and/or utilize any Class IV cable television channel in any manner from the subscriber's premises. In any case, the subscriber shall have the right and opportunity to deactivate the return path from his premises. 
(b)  Identifying subscribers. The city of a franchisee shall not, without prior valid written authorization from each subscriber so affected, provide any data identifying subscriber's names or address to any other party. 
(c)  Procurement of information. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, governmental body, or agency to procure information or data from cable subscribers' premises by use of the cable system without prior written authorization from each subscriber so affected. Valid authorization shall mean written approval from subscriber for a period of time not to exceed one year and shall not have been obtained as a condition of the grantee providing cable service to the subscriber. 
(d)  Specific authorization. 
(1)  No authorization for procurement or dissemination of subscriber identifiable information or data shall be valid unless: 
a.  It specifies the type of information or data covered; and 
b.  The parties authorized to collect, receive, store, record, transmit, or otherwise convey this information or data. 
(2)  Further, all authorizations shall specify the maximum period of time that any subscriber identifiable information or data shall be preserved in any manner or form. 
(Code 1985, § 4-431; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-49. - Tower construction standards. 
Any tower constructed for use in the city's cable television system shall comply with the standards contained in Structural Standards for Stell Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures, EIA Standards RS-222-A, as published by the Engineering Department of the Electronic Industries Association, 2001 Eye Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006. Any antenna structure used in the city's cable television system shall comply with Construction Marking, and Lighting of Antenna Structure, 47 CFR 17.1 et seq., September 1967. 
(Code 1985, § 4-432; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-50. - Compliance with OSHA regulations. 
All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation, and maintenance of the city's cable television system shall comply with the standards of the occupational safety and health administration. 
(Code 1985, § 4-433; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-51. - Establishment of a regulatory entity. 
(a)  Continuing regulatory jurisdiction. The city shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any franchise granted hereunder and may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the conduct of the business contemplated thereunder. 
(b)  Authority to establish CATV advisory board. The continuing regulatory jurisdiction of the city shall be exercised by the mayor and city council. The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall have the authority to establish and appoint a CATV advisory board consisting of five members, who shall serve for three-year terms, with such terms to be staggered. Such board's duration shall be at the pleasure of the mayor and council and should such board be established, it shall advise the mayor and city council of its regulatory jurisdiction and may have the following responsibilities and duties at the direction of the city council: 
(c)  CATV advisory board's duties. 
(1)  Resolving disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the grantee after an investigation, should the subscriber and the grantee not first be able to resolve their view or disagreements. Said decision or findings may be appealed to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Reviewing and auditing all reports and findings submitted to the city as required hereunder and such other correspondence as my be submitted to the city concerning the operation of the cable television network, and reviewing the rules and regulations set by the franchisee company. 
(3)  Assuring that all tariffs, rates, and rules pertinent to the operation of the CATV system in the city are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours and upon reasonable requests. 
(4)  Reviewing rates and recommending any rate changes to the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-434; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-52. - Protection against radiation leakage. 
Stray radiation (RF leakage) shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. 
(Code 1985, § 4-435; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-53. - Re-evaluation. 
(a)  Re-evaluation sessions. The city and the franchisee shall hold scheduled re-evaluation sessions within 60 days of the fifth anniversary date of the franchisee's obtaining certification for the system from an FCC. All such re-evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days before each session. 
(b)  Special re-evaluation sessions. Special re-evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise. All such re-evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days before each session. 
(c)  Topics to be re-evaluated. The following topics will be discussed at every scheduled re-evaluation session: service rate structures; free or discounted services; application of new technology; system performances; services provided; programming offered; customer complaint; amendments to this article; undergrounding progress; and judicial and FCC rulings. 
(d)  Additional topics. Topics, in addition to those listed, may be added if agreed upon by the parties. Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of 50 or more residents of the city, the proposed topic shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the re-evaluation session. 
(e)  Referred to CATV advisory board. The re-evaluation may be referred to the CATV advisory board for its recommendation prior to the hearing for a report in 30 days if the mayor and city council consider it in the interest of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-436; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-54. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all the rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder, in the event that the grantee: 
(1)  Violates any provision of this article, as it may be amended from time to time or any rule, order, or determination of the city or city council made pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is made without fault, or through excusable neglect. 
(2)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debt, or is adjudged as bankrupt. 
(3)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this article or the franchise, or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(4)  Fails to secure a certificate of compliance from the FCC or any other necessary license or permit within four months of the acceptance of this franchise. 
(5)  Fails to exhibit substantial program toward the completion of the construction of the system for a period of three consecutive calendar months. 
(6)  Fails to complete instruction schedule approved by the city under this franchise within the time set forth in the construction schedule approved by the city. 
(7)  The franchisee leases, subleases, sells or transfers the franchise within written consent of the mayor and city council. A sale of more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation to any entity and/or person, and/or more than ten percent of the working control of the franchisee is considered a transfer under this section. 
(b)  Such termination and cancellation shall be by action of the mayor and city council, adopted after 30 days' notice to the grantee and shall in no way affect the city's rights under the franchise agreement or any provision of law. In the event that such termination and such cancellation depend upon a finding of fact as made by the city council and/or its representatives, such findings of fact shall be conclusive on all parties; provided, however, that before this franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this section, the grantee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the city council. 
(c)  In the event that the city terminates and cancels the franchise with any grantee hereunder, then in that event, the performance bond of grantee is forfeited to the city, irrevocable and without recourse. 
(Code 1985, § 4-437; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-55. - Damaging, interfering with property of franchise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy cables, pipes, conduit, wire, line, posts, lamps or other apparatus belonging to the franchisee or intentionally and without authority to secure television cable service or in any manner to interfere with the operations of the franchisee in providing television cable service to other subscribers on the television cable system owned by the franchisee. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth herein and/or the person, who without knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such improper action, shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1985, § 4-438; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-56. - Further agreement and waiver by franchisee. 
The franchisee agrees to abide by all provisions of this article and the franchise agreement, and further agrees that it will not, at any future time, set up as against the city or city council the claim that the provisions of this article and/or franchise are unreasonable, arbitrary, or void. 
(Code 1985, § 4-439; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-57. - Security agreement. 
The provisions of section 16-34 shall not apply to the act by the grantee of any franchise under this article of granting a security interest in, or assigning the franchise as collateral security to any lender providing financing to such grantee, provided such financing shall have been approved by the mayor and city council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Neither the granting of such security interest or assignment to such lender, nor the sale or re-sale of such franchise and the distribution system or either of them by such lender in its liquidation of its collateral, shall entitle the city to have any first option of refusal to purchase, for not less than the balance, less unaccrued interest, owed at the time of such subsequent purchase by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-442; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Sec. 16-58. - Lender and successors in interest. 
Subject to the provisions of section 16-57, the grantee of any franchise granted under the provisions of this article shall be authorized, in his discretion, to grant a security interest in, or assigns as collateral security, the franchise to any lender providing financing to such grantee. No action shall be taken pursuant to this section which shall in any way impair the rights of such lender, or its successor in interest, unless and until the city shall have given written notice of any defaults or violation to such lender or its successor in interest, and allowed a reasonable time, not less than 30 days, for correction of such default violation unless and until such lender, or its successor in interest, shall have had an opportunity for a hearing before the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-443; Ord. of 4-6-1981) 
Secs. 16-59—16-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS WORKS AND GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

Sec. 16-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base year means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
Base year franchise fee factor means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day capacity as recorded by the grantee on the last day of the base year. 
Design day capacity means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
Firm customers means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily are not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
Fiscal year means the 12 months ending September 30 of each year. 
Inflation index means the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers as published by the bureau of labor statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then-current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the state public service commission for the grantee. 
(Code 1985, § 4-501) 
Sec. 16-91. - Franchise granted and limitations. 
The right is hereby granted to the grantee, its successors and assigns, to lie, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances, and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places in the city, and to use and occupy the said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places for the purpose of therein lying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing minds, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances, and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such right, when exercised as herein provided, to continue for 40 years after date of approval of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 4-502) 
Sec. 16-92. - Commencement of construction. 
The city reserves the right, upon 90 days written notice to grantee, to cancel this franchise if grantee shall not commence construction of its distribution system for the city within three years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1985, § 4-503) 
Sec. 16-93. - Subscriber rates. 
Grantee shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it at such rates as are prescribed by the public service commission or other lawful regulatory body of the state. 
(Code 1985, § 4-504) 
Sec. 16-94. - Franchise fee. 
The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the grantee by the city shall be calculated as follows: The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product to the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchising fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index expressed as a decimal to their significant digits. The following formula quantified this payment: 
FFc=FFFby x (CPI-PFA) x DDCc 
Where: 
FFc=the total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year. 
FFFby=the total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year. 
CPI-PFA=the inflation index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the state public service commission. 
DDCc=the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
FFFby=FFby/DDCby 
Where: 
FFby=the total franchise fees paid in the base year. 
DDCby=the design day capacity of the base year. 
(Code 1985, § 4-505) 
Sec. 16-95. - Responsibility for payment of franchise fee. 
(a)  Payment of franchise fee. The grantee, as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder, is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise chapter, as modified by this amendment. In addition, the grantee is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the city. 
(b)  Franchise fee in lieu of franchise fee payment; license fee, occupational tax; other payment. The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee, license fee, occupational tax, or other payment for use of the rights-of-way by the granter for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or any occupation tax on gas marketers. 
(c)  Quarterly payments. Effective for fiscal year 1999, and for each fiscal thereafter during the term of the franchises ordinance, the grantee shall remit to the city quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall be equal to one quarter of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1985, § 4-506) 
Sec. 16-96. - Annual return. 
The company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation for the annual franchise fee. 
(Code 1985, § 4-507) 
Sec. 16-97. - Delay of inflation adjustment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the company changes its rates. 
(Code 1985, § 4-508) 
Sec. 16-98. - Franchise rights subject to police powers. 
All rights herein granted and authorized shall be subject to and governed only by this article; provided, however, that the city expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights hereby granted not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 4-509) 
Sec. 16-99. - Damaging, interfering with city property. 
Grantee, upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas mains, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places of said city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-510) 
Sec. 16-100. - Hold harmless clause. 
Grantee shall save and keep harmless the said city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person whomsoever, on account of negligence of the grantee in the installation, maintenance, and repair of its mains and pipelines along said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places in the city, provided the grantee shall have been notified in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the same. 
(Code 1985, § 4-511) 
Sec. 16-101. - Franchise renewal. 
Unless 120 days' written notice is given by one party to the other prior to the expiration date of this agreement, this franchise shall be considered as renewed and binding in all its provisions for ten years after such expiration and this franchise shall so continue in operation and effect for further terms of ten years each until such notice be given by either party prior to the expiration of one such renewed term. 
(Code 1985, § 4-512) 
Sec. 16-102. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between this article and the original franchise dated March 3, 1986, this article shall control. All terms, conditions, and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with this article. 
(Code 1985, § 4-513) 
Chapter 18 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Ad valorem tax. 
(a)  Assessment and fair market value. See O.C.G.A. § 48-5-252. 
(b)  Appeal of assessment. See O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 et seq. 
(c)  When taxes due and payable. Ad valorem taxes shall become due on March 1 of each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to tax payers at least 60 days prior to due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid, provided that the minimum interest will be $1.00. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. The following notice shall be mailed with all tax bills: 
Notice 1. Taxes are due in full by the date shown on the enclosed bill. Interest will accrue at the rate of one percent (1%) per month beginning on the day following the due date, provided that the minimum interest payment will be one dollar ($1.00) (GA. Code Section 48-2-40 and 48-5-148). Payment must be received at Woodbine City Hall by the close of business or postmarked on the due date shown on the tax bill. Payments will first be applied to interest and penalty on any previous year tax, next to any fifa's or other costs, next to the oldest tax bill, in that order for each year of past due tax, next to interest, penalty and costs on current year taxes, then to current year taxes. Paid in full receipts may not be issued until all taxes, plus interest, penalty and costs are paid in full. All taxes due must be paid in full on or before the close of business on the due date shown on the tax bill. 
(d)  Failure to pay tax. The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. The following procedure shall be used by the tax collector in the collection of delinquent property taxes. 
(1)  Within ten days following the due date, the following notice shall be sent to all delinquent taxpayers: 
Notice 2. According to our records, your (year) Woodbine City taxes became past due on ________. Interest at one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, began accruing on the day following the due date as provided in Section 18-1(d) of the Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia. The minimum interest payment is $1.00. 

 
The total amount due above must be received in this office by the close of the business day or postmarked by (one month past first due date) to avoid additional interest charges. Any amounts remaining delinquent on the above date will be filed on the execution docket of the Camden County Superior Court and turned over to the city marshal for collection. Additional charges, including fifa costs, will be added to the total amount due. 
If you feel that this amount is in error, or if you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact this office. 
Sincerely, 
City Tax Collector 
(2)  Within ten days following the first past due date, the following notice shall be sent to delinquent taxpayers showing record of some payment on current year taxes. This section also applies to payments made after the due date which show a balance due because of interest charges. 
Notice 3a. Thank you for your recent payment on your city taxes. According to our records, there is a balance remaining in the amount of _____. This may be the result of interest charges which began on the day following the due date. 
City ordinances require that all taxes be paid in full or be recorded on the execution docket of the Superior Court and turned over to the City Marshal for collection. The amount listed above must be received in this office by the business day or be postmarked by (two (2) months past due date) to avoid additional interest and fifa charges. All payments will first be credited to the oldest interest charges, next to fifa, and last to the oldest taxes due. 
In addition to interest charges, Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 48-2-44 makes mandatory a ten percent (10%) penalty on all non-homesteaded property and homesteaded property with taxes over five-hundred dollars ($500.00) if the taxes are not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date. The penalty is mandatory and must be calculated on the original tax amount due. A penalty of $_____ must be added to your bill on (90 days past due) if there is any delinquent amount on city tax records. 
If you have any questions about the taxes due, or if you feel that an error has been made, please do not hesitate to contact this office. 
Sincerely, 
Tax Collector 
(3)  Within ten days following the first past due date, fifa's will be filed at the county superior court and adequate charge to cover the cost of filing and removing the fifa will be added to the tax bill; for those who have no record of payment on current year's taxes, the following notice (Notice #3b) will be sent. 
Notice 3b. On (date of first notice) a past due reminder was sent regarding Woodbine City property taxes due. According to our records, the taxes still have delinquent amounts remaining as follows: 

 
In accordance with Section 18-1(e) of the Code of the City of Woodbine, Georgia, the taxes due have been filed on the execution docket of the Camden County Superior Court. The total amount due listed above must be received in this office by the close of the business day or be postmarked by (two months past the due date) to avoid additional interest charges. Any of the above amount remaining delinquent on (the day following the above date) will be turned over to the City Marshal's Sale as provided by law. All payments will first be credited to the oldest interest charges, next to fifa, next to oldest taxes due in that order until the tax bill is paid in full. 
In addition to interest charges, Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 48-2-44 makes mandatory a ten percent (10%) penalty on all non-homesteaded property and homesteaded property with taxes over five-hundred dollars ($500.00) if the taxes are not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date. The penalty of $_____ must be added to your bill on (90 days after due date) if there is any delinquent amount on the city tax records. If you have any questions about the taxes due or if you feel that an error has been made, please do not hesitate to contact this office. 
Sincerely, 
Tax Collector 
(4)  Within ten days of the second past due date, the following notice (Notice #4) will be sent to those taxpayers still remaining delinquent by the city marshal: 
Notice 4: On (date of last notice) you were again informed of the amount still outstanding on your past due city taxes. The City Tax Collector has recorded the delinquent taxes on the execution docket of the Camden County Superior Court and turned them over to this office for collection. You are hereby notified that I have this day levied upon: 
(Legal description of property) 
To satisfy a tax execution against you for the years _____, plus penalty, interest, and costs totaling $_____. This amount must be received in the City Hall by the close of business or be postmarked by (three months past third past due date) to avoid additional interest charges. Advertising costs will be added weekly and interest will continue to accumulate after that date. The date of the first advertisement of said property will be (four weeks prior to Marshal's Sale) in the legal organ of the county. This advertisement will be placed in the above mentioned paper for four (4) consecutive weeks. If this bill, including all subsequent advertising, interest, and other costs, has not been paid in full prior to (date of tax sale), the property will be sold to the highest bidder at twelve o'clock noon, on the steps of the Camden County Courthouse. Advertising of this property may be prevented and further costs saved by your prompt action. If you feel that an error has been made, please contact the city tax collector at (912) 576-3211/3212 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
In addition to interest charges, Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 48-2-44 makes mandatory a ten percent (10%) penalty on all non-homesteaded property with taxes over five-hundred dollars ($500.00) if the taxes are not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date. The penalty is mandatory and must be calculated on the original tax amount due. A penalty of $_____ must be added to your bill on (90 days after due date) if there is any delinquent amount on the city tax records. 
Sincerely, 
Tax Collector 
(5)  Marshal's sale will be held on the front steps of the city hall on the earliest date provided by law after proper notice and advertising has been published. 
(e)  Against whom charged. See O.C.G.A. § 48-5-9. 
(f)  Exempted property. See O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41. 
(Code 1985, § 4-101) 
Sec. 18-2. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due, the city shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriff's sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)  Sale by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
(c)  Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of municipal taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth by law. 
(Code 1985, § 4-108) 
State Law reference— Tax sales and redemption of property sold for taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-3. - Insurance businesses. 
(a)  Insurer license fees. There is hereby levied, for each year, an annual license fee upon each insurer with their principle place of business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For each separate principle business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "insurer" means company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Insurance agency license fees, independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $15.00 for each location within the city. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. The tax imposed shall not apply to annuity considerations. 
(e)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(f)  Due date for license fees. See O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2. 
(Code 1985, § 4-104) 
Sec. 18-4. - Public utility franchise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on each electric light and power company, and other public utility making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places of the city, for the purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax in the amount of four percent of the annual gross revenue received from residential, commercial, and industrial sales. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charge for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from tele-typewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charge for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in the definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Code 1985, § 4-105) 
Sec. 18-5. - Hotel/motel tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby imposed an excise tax in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the furnishing of value to the public of any rooms, lodging or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupational taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(b)  Due date. The tax herein levied shall be paid at the same time that state sales tax is paid. 
(c)  Use of funds. The funds collected hereunder shall be made available to the governing authority of the city exclusively to promote tourism and the administrative expenses incurred therein (said expenses shall not exceed 30 percent of the amount of taxes collected hereunder during any fiscal year) and shall not go into the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-109; Ord. of 11-7-1988) 
Sec. 18-6. - Financial institutions. 
(a)  Purpose. To impose business license taxes on financial institutions located within the city. To repeal conflicting ordinances and for other purposes. 
(b)  Financial institutions business license tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. There is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and National Banking Associations, Federal Savings and Loan Associations and State Building and Loan Associations, a business tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" means gross receipts, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this chapter shall be $1,000.00 per year, except as provided by state law. 
(c)  Due date; filing of return. 
(1)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information furnished in said return. 
(2)  The due date of the tax levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205) 
Sec. 18-7. - Sales of certain literature. 
(a)  No place of business located in the city shall sell, or keep for sale, any magazine, paperback book, or literature of any kind which regularly depicts therein males or females in the nude which appeals solely to prurient interests except upon compliance with this section. 
(b)  All such magazines, paperback books and literature shall be placed in a rack separate from all other literature kept and sold in said place of business. The rack in which said literature is stored shall be so constructed so as to allow only the name of the magazine to be visible. Each such magazine, paperback book or other literature shall, at all times while in said place of business, have thereon a wrapper which conceals all except the name of such magazine, paperback or other literature. Such wrapper shall not be removed while such magazine, paperback or other literature remains in said place of business. 
(Code 1985, § 9-214) 
Sec. 18-8. - Truck sales of meat/seafood (fresh/frozen). 
Applicants must produce the required state license (one license per vehicle) and a letter of compliance from the county public health department prior to receiving a city license and selling merchandise. 
(Code 1985, § 9-215) 
Secs. 18-9—18-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business license taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 18-35. - License required; fee; display of license; late payment penalty. 
(a)  Except as to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations excluded by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16(a), and except as to those persons excluded by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, there is hereby levied an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which have one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city. There is also hereby levied an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the corporate limits. 
(b)  The occupation tax required by this section shall be $10.00 per employee of the licensee in the city. 
(c)  Should any occupation tax or license fee imposed remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax or fee, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 1985, § 9-103) 
State Law reference— Authority to require license, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7; late payment penalty, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 18-36. - Applications. 
Every person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind of business to be carried on; 
d.  Name and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state, or federal government; and 
g.  Such additional information which the city clerk or council may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article. 
(3)  Verification. Each application shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer of a corporation. 
(4)  Payment of fee. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the fee chargeable for such license, such amount to be prorated by quarters to the end of the fiscal year. 
a.  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this article. 
b.  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(5)  Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this section shall be kept in strict confidence by the city clerk, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this article. 
(6)  False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(Code 1985, § 9-101) 
Sec. 18-37. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Review by city officers. If any provision of this article or any license ordinance of the city provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the application to such officer within 48 hours of the time of the receipt of the application. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the city clerk within seven days after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Limitation on issuance. No license shall be issued to any application whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
(c)  Issuance of license. Upon the express approval of the city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized, bear the date of issuance and the signature of the mayor and city clerk. 
(d)  Council discretion. The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 1985, § 9-102) 
Sec. 18-38. - Regulatory fee. 
A regulatory fee of $50.00 is hereby levied on all establishments serving or selling food of any kind. Such fee shall be paid at the same time that the license tax or fee is required to be paid by this article. 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8, 48-13-9. 
Sec. 18-39. - Inspections. 
(a)  Search of premises. Whenever inspections of the premises used for, or in connection with, the operation of licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the city whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. 
(c)  Refusal to allow inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make to such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection, provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 1985, § 9-104) 
Sec. 18-40. - Termination and renewal of license. 
(a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 of each year when no provision to the contrary is made. Persons holding a valid business license on December 31 shall be allowed to conduct business until 12:01 a.m. March 1 of the following year, under the previous year's license. This privilege to operate under the previous year's license is contingent upon payment of license fees in full and does not release any person, partnership or corporation from its obligation to obtain a license for its operation of a business between January 1 and the last day of February in any year. 
(b)  Licensees requesting renewal shall pay the required license fees to the city clerk. The license shall be considered renewed unless the city council votes to refuse renewal within 30 days of payment of fee. If no business has been conducted in the new year under the provision of subsection (a) of this section, the fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  Any licensee conducting business into the year following termination of their license as provided in subsection (a) of this section, must renew their license before April 1. Licensees failing to renew their business license shall pay a late payment penalty of ten percent of the license fee, and be subject to presentation in municipal court. 
(Code 1985, § 9-105) 
Sec. 18-41. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
The city council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this chapter to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee, revoke such license in its entirety; suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the license on probation or place other conditions thereon as the council may deem necessary. 
(Code 1985, § 9-106) 
Sec. 18-42. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provisions to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, and provided that the licensee complies with all building and zoning requirements. 
(Code 1985, § 9-107) 
Sec. 18-43. - Transfer of licenses. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee, but in cases where the ownership is changed and both the name and location of the licensed business or occupation are maintained, the mayor and city council may allow the license to be transferred. 
(Code 1985, § 9-108) 
Sec. 18-44. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee of $5.00 to the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 9-109) 
Sec. 18-45. - Branch offices. 
For the purposes of this article, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. 
(Code 1985, § 9-110) 
Sec. 18-46. - Joint license. 
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. 
(Code 1985, § 9-111) 
Sec. 18-47. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained or renewed a license therefor as required by this article, or who shall violate any other provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Code 1985, § 9-112) 
Secs. 18-48—18-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-70. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses generally known as and defined herein as adult entertainment establishments. To that end, this article has been enacted in the interests of: 
(1)  Promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  Preserving the quality of life in residential and business areas of the city; and 
(3)  Promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of residential and commercial property valves. 
(b)  This article is intended to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments and businesses in order to serve the legitimate governmental interests set out herein. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(1)) 
Sec. 18-71. - Legislative findings of fact. 
Based upon the results of an investigation and the attendant evidence produced, this council finds that: 
(1)  The outright prohibition of adult entertainment establishments improperly infringes upon protected forms of expression; but that reasonable regulation of such businesses so as to curtail and prevent pernicious secondary effects is both permissible and desirable. 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments and businesses, if unregulated, are likely to lead to an increase in illegal sexual activities, drug and alcohol offenses, disorderly conduct and other criminal activity. 
(3)  Law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment establishments and businesses are extremely limited due to the growth of the city and county and such resources are best conserved by regulating and licensing adult entertainment establishments. 
(4)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents of the city require that adult entertainment businesses and establishments and their locations, operations, employees and owners be regulated and licensed in order to preserve and protect the quality of life in the residential and business environs of the city. 
(5)  The location of adult entertainment establishments and businesses in close proximity to each other adversely affects the property values, causes an increase in crime and encourages residents and other businesses in proximity to such adult entertainment establishments to move and locate elsewhere. 
(6)  There is presently in North Florida, particularly in the Jacksonville area, and in Southeast Georgia, an increasing trend toward nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment, and toward the utilization of nude and semi-nude employees engaged in other service-oriented aspects of and by adult entertainment establishments. 
(7)  The commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity consists of the use of nude and semi-nude entertainment in connection with or for the sale of goods or services, and the receipt of money by the person engaged in nude or semi-nude entertainment in exchange for or as consideration for a nude or semi-nude performance by such individual. Competitive commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity is adverse to the public's interest in quality of life and commerce and the total community environment in the city and surrounding areas. 
(8)  The commercial exploitation of nude and semi-nude conduct, acts, exhibitions and entertainment frequently occurs in commercial establishment increase in crime and encourages residents and other businesses in proximity to such adult entertainment establishments to move and locate elsewhere. 
(9)  There is a direct relationship between the consumption of alcoholic beverages concurrently with nude and semi-nude activities, conduct and entertainment and an increase in criminal activities, disturbances of the peace and good order of the city, and the concurrency of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. 
(10)  The combination of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude entertainment are inimical and adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life and commerce and quality of the environment of the city. 
(11)  It is the duty and responsibility of the mayor and council to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents, the stability of the value and use of property within the city, and the character of its neighborhoods and developments. 
(12)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, it is necessary and advisable to prohibit nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment in commercial establishments at which alcoholic beverages are available, sold, or consumed. 
(13)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, therefore, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, contractors, entertainers, performers, patrons, spectators, clientele and persons on the premises of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(2)) 
Sec. 18-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means the premises on which the following defined establishments operate or which the following defined activities occur: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; 
(2)  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means any place where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises which features, uses, employees, or displays topless dancers, bottomless dancers or nude dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers or dancers. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel/motel means a business which rents lodging rooms to the public for the purpose of engaging in conduct or entertainment defined under subsection (3) of the definition of the term "adult business" in this section. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphases on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphases on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureaus; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish, or offer to furnish, names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Massage parlor/bathhouse means any establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contract between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, or copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sexual related crime in the past five years. 
Licensed day care center means a day care center licensed by the state and/or a local government that provides care, training, education custody, treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means, if a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least five percent of the outstanding shares. 
Residential, pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
School means a public or private facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, including any playground, stadium, or other structure. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(3)) 
Sec. 18-73. - Operational rules. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the following regulations concerning their operation, to wit: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and from 8:00 a.m. Saturday through 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(2)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon its premises. 
(3)  All adult entertainment establishments shall conspicuously display the permit required by this article. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment for any purpose or reason. 
(5)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(4)) 
Sec. 18-74. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
In addition to the regulations set forth in section 18-73, erotic dance establishments shall be subject to and shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license or permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  No later than the February 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment permits shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years of age or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose, which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(6)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(7)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(8)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(9)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(10)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting means illumination equal to 3 5/10 footcandles per square foot. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(5)) 
Sec. 18-75. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(6)) 
Sec. 18-76. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(7)) 
Sec. 18-77. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during operating hours. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(8)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or permit, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(9)) 
Sec. 18-79. - Admission of minor unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than 21 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of 21 years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 21 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A current, valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state department of public safety reflecting that such person is 21 years of age or older; or 
(3)  A current, valid military identification certifying that such person is 21 years of age or older. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(10)) 
Sec. 18-80. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult bathhouse or massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(11)) 
Sec. 18-81. - Location; building and signage restrictions. 
(a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, licensed day care facility, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than one acre of land containing at least 400 feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way. 
(b)  A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 100 square feet of gross building area, or for every three customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Signage for such establishments shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 25 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground to highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be ten feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Buildings and structures operated and maintained in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any property line. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the property lines. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(12)) 
Sec. 18-82. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be no less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character, as defined by this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including, but not limited to, date of birth, current address, current telephone and pager numbers, two color photographs of the prospective employee at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months, and a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $500.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license or permit. Violation of the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(13)) 
Sec. 18-83. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of permit granted hereunder. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(31)) 
Sec. 18-84. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(32)) 
Sec. 18-85. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The permittee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city building official. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain, in a readily accessible place, a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(33)) 
Sec. 18-86. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the city building official on his finding of a violation of this article, resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city building official shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city building official may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city building official. The city building official shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(34)) 
Sec. 18-87. - Abatement as a sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(35)) 
Sec. 18-88. - Notices, registered agent, jurisdiction. 
(a)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the permittee, may be served. This person shall act as a registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of the county. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he is a resident of the county. The permittee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk as part of the permit application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the terms of this article, the permittee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment establishment or the permittee, which includes the operator or any owner, to enforce the provisions of this article, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any office, division, department or other agency under this article to any permittee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: 
(1)  Personal delivery; or 
(2)  By certified United States mail addressed to permittee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or a notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(36)) 
Sec. 18-89. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, and the state. 
(b)  The county health department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(c)  The city fire department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments located within the city to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(d)  The city building official or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the city and the county. 
(e)  The city administrator or designee shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city building official. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(37)) 
Sec. 18-90. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(38)) 
Secs. 18-91—18-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 18-109. - Application for permit. 
(a)  No person shall operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued by the city. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $2,500.00, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. The city clerk shall issue a receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(14)) 
Sec. 18-110. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous address of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  If a person, acceptable written proof that the applicant is a least 21 years of age; 
(5)  If a person, the applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  If a person, two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions and the disposition of such violations; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and address of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of the county superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provision of the subsection pertinent to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms of an individual applicant under this section, but only one application fee shall be charged. If the applicant is a state corporation, it shall attach to the application a certified copy of its articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto and its most recent annual report. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, it shall attach a certified copy of its certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments and its most recent annual report. If the applicant does or proposes to do business under a trade name, it shall attach a copy of the recorded trade name registration document to the application; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the city administrator or designee may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including the date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license or permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or any crime or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(17)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(19)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(20)  An interior floor plan drawing showing the location of all interior walls and/or partitions, stages, platforms and/or dance floors; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by a manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official; 
(22)  The written consent of the registered agent as required by section 18-88. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(15)) 
Sec. 18-111. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city hall and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(16)) 
Sec. 18-112. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 60 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officer or directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct, or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offense, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in the state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by the city or any other governmental entity located in or out of the state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all requirements contained in section 18-81 and with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards as evidenced by inspection report prepared by city building official and state fire marshal's representatives; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the proposed premises complies with the distance requirements and limitations contained in section 18-81 and is not located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(10)  That the grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States; 
(11)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(17)) 
Sec. 18-113. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
(a)  No permit provided for by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(18)) 
Sec. 18-114. - Permit; refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of the application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(19)) 
Sec. 18-115. - Permit; renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(20)) 
Sec. 18-116. - Permit; nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(21)) 
Sec. 18-117. - Change of location of name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee established by resolution of the city council has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the planning director. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(22)) 
Sec. 18-118. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment permit or license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the even the city clerk seeks to suspend or revoke a permit, the city clerk shall give written notification to the permittee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation. 
(b)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke a permit in the event of any of the following: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process; 
(2)  A permittee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence; 
(3)  A permittee violated or knowingly allowed violation of any provision of this adult entertainment division, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violation; 
(4)  A permittee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime and/or a crime involving moral turpitude by the state or city regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this division; 
(5)  A permittee failed to pay any fee, application/permit fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this division or any other ordinance of the city; 
(6)  A permittee has, after the date of the original application and floor plan approval, made interior floor plan alterations, without first obtaining approval, and such alterations involve the addition of private viewing rooms, cubicles, booths or similar areas. 
(c)  In the event that the city clerk determines that a permit violation has occurred, such permit shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation, the permit shall be suspended for 60 days. For a third and all subsequent violation, the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. Any permit that has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period shall be revoked. In addition, any permittee found to be in violation of section 18-73(1), (2) and (4) shall be subject to immediate permit revocation; provided, however, that permittee shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with section 18-119(b). No permittee or any other applicant may apply for a permit for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of permit suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the permittee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the effective date of written notice received by permittee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city attorney may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the permittee upon appeal to the mayor and city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and city council, said meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days after receipt of appeal. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(23)) 
Sec. 18-119. - Appeals. 
(a)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to mail written notice of hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume responsibility for the mailing of notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
(b)  Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this division may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(d)  The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearing conducted under this division. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(e)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city administrator. 
(f)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(g)  The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. It the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this division; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 1985, § 9-216(24—29)) 
Secs. 18-120—18-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-137. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad, box car, boat, or public room in any hotel, lodginghouse, apartment, or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place-to-place, from house-to-house, or from street-to-street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products, or provisions, who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place-to-place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(2)) 
Sec. 18-138. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not be applicable to traveling salesmen or nonresident merchants as provided in O.C.G.A. ch. 34-10, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious, or philanthropic organizations. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(3)) 
Sec. 18-139. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No license under this section, nor anyone on his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound or sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(9)) 
Secs. 18-140—18-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-162. - License required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant, as such terms are defined herein, who does business within the city, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(1)) 
Sec. 18-163. - Application. 
Application for a license under this section shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The fingerprints of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or in lieu thereof at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county in which the business is to be conducted, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes the good character and business responsibility of such person to the satisfaction of the mayor and council; 
(2)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted; 
(3)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant, within the six months next preceding the date of said application, conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street addresses of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(4)  A statement of the nature, character, and quality of the goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares, and merchandise; where the goods or property to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed; 
(5)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done, or proposed to be done, in order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all said advertising whether by hand bills, circulars, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits thereto; and 
(6)  Whether or not the persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(4)) 
Sec. 18-164. - Bond. 
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in a transient or itinerant business as provided in this section, the applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk a bond running to the city in the sum of $500.00, executed by the applicant, as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state; said bond to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether said misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares, and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city for the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the city attorney, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(5)) 
Sec. 18-165. - Service of process. 
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in business as a peddler or itinerant merchant in the city, the applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk as his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license and the bond given as required by this section, or for the performance of the conditions of said bond, or for any breach thereof, which said instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so made, shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the license under this division, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement or service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at this last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of said process. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(6)) 
Sec. 18-166. - Fee established. 
The license fee for each peddler and itinerant merchant doing business in the city shall be $10.00 per day, $25.00 per week, $50.00 per month, $100.00 per year. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(7)) 
Sec. 18-167. - Duty to exhibit. 
All persons obtaining a license under the provisions of this section shall be required to exhibit such license at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205(8)) 
Secs. 18-168—18-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 18-188. - License. 
(a)  Each pawnbroker doing business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business in the city shall be $500.00. 
(c)  No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the city council until the city administrator or designee has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 9-207(1—3)) 
Sec. 18-189. - Limitation on issuance. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or burglary or robbery. 
(Code 1985, § 9-207(4)) 
Sec. 18-190. - Records. 
Each pawnbroker license hereunder shall furnish to the city administrator or designee each week a list of every article pledged with him or sold to him during the previous week, giving a full and accurate description of the article, from whom it was received, and the hour of the day received. 
(Code 1985, § 9-207(5)) 
Sec. 18-191. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1985, § 9-207(7)) 
Sec. 18-192. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the city administrator or designee any article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1985, § 9-207(8)) 
Secs. 18-193—18-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - USED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Used Motor Vehicle Dealers' and Used Motor Vehicle Parts Dealers' Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-225. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to apply to any individual making an isolated sale of his own vehicle. 
(Code 1985, § 9-209(7)) 
Sec. 18-226. - License required. 
(a)  Any used car or used motor vehicle dealer, as such terms are defined in the Used Motor Vehicle Dealers' and Used Motor Vehicle Parts Dealers' Registration Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.), who does business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  The annual business license fee for each used car or used motor vehicle dealer doing business in the city shall be $150.00. 
(c)  No action on any application for a license under this article shall be taken by the city council until the city administrator or designee has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(d)  No license under this article shall be issued to any applicant who has not been licensed by the state board of registration of used car dealers. 
(Code 1985, § 9-209(1—4)) 
Sec. 18-227. - Records. 
Each used car or used motor vehicle dealer licensed hereunder shall keep a record of all motor vehicles offered for sale, exchange, or disposal to the public, which record shall show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial number, and its engine number, and which record shall always be kept available for the city administrator or designee and open to his inspection at any time. It shall be the further duty of every such person to immediately report to the city administrator or designee the presence in his place of business of any motor vehicle on which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered. 
(Code 1985, § 9-209(5)) 
Sec. 18-228. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the city administrator or designee to make inspections from time to time for the purpose of seeing that the records required herein are being kept. 
(Code 1985, § 9-209(6)) 
Secs. 18-229—18-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; scrap metal processors, O.C.G.A. § 43-43-1 et seq.; junkyard control, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq. 

Sec. 18-250. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this section. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but the term "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard, as defined above, within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(2)) 
Sec. 18-251. - License required. 
Each junk dealer, as such term is defined in this section, who does business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(1)) 
Sec. 18-252. - Application. 
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments; 
(2)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years; 
(3)  The name, residence, address, and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
(4)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings, uses; and 
(5)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators, and walls. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(3)) 
Sec. 18-253. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a license to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the city council until the planning commission has reviewed such application and forwarded its recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(4)) 
Sec. 18-254. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each junk dealer doing business in the city shall be $150.00. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(5)) 
Sec. 18-255. - General operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is being used in the licensed business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  Combustible material of any kind, not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business, shall not be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of section 12-22. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits which shall have a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of eight square feet measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind except one sign of the licensee not exceeding 15 square feet in size. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any law enforcement officer at any reasonable time. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the community or of any nearby residents. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(6)) 
Sec. 18-256. - Records. 
Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent register kept on the business premises, giving the name, residence, and address of a person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(7)) 
Sec. 18-257. - Minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(8)) 
Sec. 18-258. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles, or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall, upon demand, produce such article or thing to any law enforcement officer for examination. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(9)) 
Sec. 18-259. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 9-210(10)) 
Secs. 18-260—18-281. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AUCTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Auctioneers, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-282. - License required. 
Each person who desires to conduct an auction within the city shall be required to obtain a license therefor from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(1)) 
Sec. 18-283. - Fee established. 
The business license fee for each auction licensed under this section shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(2)) 
Sec. 18-284. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  A statement setting forth when, where, and for how long the auction sale will be conducted; 
(2)  A certified copy of the state auctioneer's license of the person who is to conduct the auction; and 
(3)  A full and true inventory of all the articles to be sold at the auction sale, together with an affidavit that all information contained in the application is true and that the inventory contains a true listing of all the articles to be sold at said auction. 
(b)  No auction shall be held except as set forth in the application and affidavit. No other articles shall be sold except those included in the sworn inventory unless a new affidavit shall be filed listing additional goods to be sold. No other person shall be allowed to conduct the auction sale except such person listed in the affidavit unless a new affidavit is filed, setting forth such other person who may be the auctioneer and employed to conduct such auction. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(3)) 
Sec. 18-285. - Bond. 
Every applicant for a license under this article shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city in the amount of $5,000.00 with surety acceptable to and approved by the city clerk, conditioned that the said applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning auctions and auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts of all his sales to any person employing him to make the same, will not practice any fraud or deceit upon bidders or purchasers of property from him at any auction sale or suffer or permit any person in his employ to practice any such fraud, deceit, negligence, or other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agent, or employees in the conduct of any auction or in the exercise of the calling of the auctioneer. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which conforms to the above requirements, may be permitted by the city administrator, in his discretion, in lieu of a bond. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(4)) 
Sec. 18-286. - Cappers, boosters, or by-bidders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another in any auction sale as a by-bidder or what is sometimes known as a capper or booster, or to make or to accept any false or misleading bid, or to pretend to buy or sell any article sold or offered for sale at such auction. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(5)) 
Sec. 18-287. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this section shall be held to apply to auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers, or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at auction. 
(Code 1985, § 9-211(6)) 
Secs. 18-288—18-307. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, AND PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 18-308. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food-dispensing facilities, and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1985, § 9-912(2)) 
Sec. 18-309. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to local nonprofit organizations holding fund raising carnivals or public organizations. 
(Code 1985, § 9-212(6)) 
Sec. 18-310. - License. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival, or public exhibition, as such terms are defined herein, without having first obtained a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  The business license fee imposed on each circus, carnival, or public exhibition operating within the city limits shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  No license under this article shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival, or public exhibition must have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers, and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public; 
(2)  All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical, and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the city, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards; 
(3)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance, indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Code 1985, § 9-212(1), (3), (4)) 
Chapter 20 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with a violation of any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by the city administrator, the building inspector, or any code enforcement officer. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the occurrence of the infraction and the day, hour, and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a code enforcement officer either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued in violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person, such as the owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1985, § 5-105) 
Sec. 20-2. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for same. 
(Code 1985, § 5-107) 
Sec. 20-3. - Arrest and bond. 
When a law enforcement officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense or a bond with a good security to secure the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him in the city or county jail until a trial can be held, provided that the mayor, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. 
(Code 1985, § 5-108) 
Sec. 20-4. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety bond, shall pass on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein, which date shall not be less than ten days from the passage of such ruling, why they should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon. 
(Code 1985, § 5-109) 
Sec. 20-5. - Court costs. 
The court costs, which shall be charged against a defendant in the municipal court in the event of his conviction, shall not exceed $5.00, which sum shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1985, § 5-110) 
Sec. 20-6. - Malicious prosecution. 
Whenever the judge of the municipal court, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall assess the prosecution with the court costs and such punitive damages as he deems appropriate. 
(Code 1985, § 5-111) 
Sec. 20-7. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands, or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 1985, § 5-112) 
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another or his reasonable and comfortable use of his property, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one with fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 1985, § 6-501) 
Sec. 22-20. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of the city, except for a nuisance hereinafter excepted, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this article. 
(1)  Nuisance abatement initiation proceeding. Initiation proceeding to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city clerk, which such complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same is a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered, abated, and removed by the mayor and council. Such notice shall be served at least two days prior to the date set for the hearing by any code enforcement officer of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's most notorious place of abode. A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant. 
(3)  Order or abatement. If, after hearing all the evidence, the mayor and council should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the mayor shall issue an order directed to the code enforcement officer, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the mayor, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
(Code 1985, § 6-503) 
Sec. 22-21. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 22-20 shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. The person causing such nuisance shall be entitled to a hearing immediately after the abatement. 
(Code 1985, § 6-504) 
Secs. 22-22—22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS 

Sec. 22-46. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within the city to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths to obtain a height exceeding ten inches on such property. For the purposes of this section, the term "weeds" means jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
(Code 1985, § 13-108) 
Sec. 22-47. - Removal by city. 
(a)  Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the city administrator upon which weeds or other prohibited flora are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section that such growths must be removed, cut, and/or destroyed within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last-known address. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any other owner or occupant so notified to remove, cut, and/or destroy such weeds or other unsightly growths within the designated time period, the director of public works is authorized and empowered to provide for the removal, cutting, and/or destroying of such growths by or for the city. The actual cost of such weed removal shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and, in the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, it shall become a lien upon the premises, enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1985, § 13-108(1, 2)) 
Secs. 22-48—22-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ACCUMULATION OF JUNK 

Sec. 22-68. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to require the proper maintenance of premises to retain property values and to protect the general environment and appearance of neighborhoods and areas. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(1)) 
Sec. 22-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a carport, attached or detached garage, storage building or any other such not-for-habitation buildings on the premises. 
Derelict automotive vehicle means a vehicle which: 
(1)  Is unusable due to disrepair because one or more of the major parts needed for its operation has been removed or destroyed or has been made not safe for operation of the vehicle through disrepair or damage; and 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents and other animals to exist and attracts children, vagrants or other individuals and may cause injury to them. 
Derelict boat or trailer-type vehicle means a boat or trailer-type vehicle which: 
(1)  Is dismantled, partially dismantled, deteriorated or not safe for use due to disrepair or damage; 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that is provides a place for insects, rodents, and other animals to exist and attracts children, vagrants or other individuals and may cause injury to them. 
Established driveway means an area that is paved, graveled, bare of vegetation, or otherwise clearly indicative of the area that is normally used for vehicles to enter onto or exit from real property from or to a public or private street. 
Front yard means any portion of the property between the right-of-way line of an abutting street and the building line for the principal building on the lot and extending from property line to property line along such building line. If there is no building on the property, the entire property shall be deemed the front yard. 
Person means any natural person, corporation and partnership, authority created by statute, association or other entity or combination thereof. 
To place means to establish the presence on property of an object which: 
(1)  Is capable of being moved or removed which is not affixed to the real property; and 
(2)  Is present for a period of ten consecutive days whether or not the location of the item on the property is changed. 
Vehicle and/or automobile means any item of personal property which is not related to the use and purpose for which the real property is occupied or owned or permitted by the applicable zoning classification. Objects under the term "vehicle" and/or "automobile" shall also include junk materials; machinery and equipment; appliance or other household items; lumber and building materials; and dirt, sand, fill, rock, stone or other materials not forming part of a structure or landscaping. The term "vehicle" and/or "automobile" means an automobile, truck, van, or other motor vehicle designed and intended for use in transporting people and goods. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(2)) 
Sec. 22-70. - Occupants or owners to keep premises free of litter, debris, junk materials, derelict vehicles and overgrowth. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant or the owner of any premises within the city to have or to place any of the following on the premises to the extent and in a manner that could threaten or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or could adversely affect and impair the economic value of adjacent property: 
(1)  Any accumulation of litter, debris, refuse, garbage, or animal excrement on any front, side, or rear yard or on any porch, or underneath any building or in any accessory building. 
(2)  Any object on the front yard or on a front porch. 
(3)  An object on the side or rear yards, or on side or rear porches or underneath any building or in any accessory building that is visible from a street or lane unless covered or enclosed so as not to be visible from a street or lane. 
(4)  Any overgrown grass or weeds of a height of 18 inches or more or any other unkempt vegetation in any yard, whether the front, side, or rear yard. 
(5)  Any storage building on the front yard or any dilapidated storage building on the side or rear yard. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place an automotive vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle on the front yard of the premises unless placed on an established driveway or placed parallel and within five feet of an established driveway. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle, or derelict boat or trailer-type vehicle or parts thereof on a front yard, and it shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle, or derelict boar or trailer-type vehicle or parts thereof on the side or rear yards if visible from a street, lane or adjoining property unless enclosed in an accessory building so as not to be visible from the street, lane or adjoining property. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to material which is being used in connection with a construction activity taking place on the premises, provided the construction activity is being diligently pursued and complies with applicable ordinances and codes. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(3)) 
Sec. 22-71. - Notification of owner and tenant. 
Whenever any provision of this article is being violated and the land on which the violation exists is privately-owned, the city shall notify the owner and/or any tenant and/or any user in possession of the land on which the alleged violation exists to abate the alleged violation within 30 days of the date of service of notice. Notice shall be by personal service or certified mail addressed to the party in violation at the address where the party is determined to be located; or, if necessary, notice shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(4)) 
Sec. 22-72. - Request for hearing. 
The person to whom the notice is directed may file a written request for a hearing before the city council within the 30-day period of compliance set forth herein. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(5)) 
Sec. 22-73. - Procedure for hearing. 
(a)  The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the person to whom the notice is directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the person to whom the notice has been directed may introduce such evidence or witnesses as either party deems necessary. 
(b)  After such hearing, a determination shall be made as to whether or not a violation exists; and if the existence of the violation is affirmed by the city council, then same shall be abated within five days of receipt of this determination by the party affected. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(6)) 
Sec. 22-74. - Adoption of Georgia Code. 
Pursuant to state law, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-1—41-2-17 are hereby adopted as a part of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(7)) 
Sec. 22-75. - Violations. 
The failure to abate the alleged violation as set forth in the written notice within 30 days of the receipt of the notice or within the five days of the receipt of the notice after the hearing shall be deemed a violation of this article and a citation shall be issued accordingly. 
(Code 1985, § 13-109(8)) 
Secs. 22-76—22-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNFIT, UNSAFE OR BLIGHTED BUILDINGS OR PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of property nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 et seq. 

Sec. 22-94. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try issues concerning the existence and abatement of public nuisances within the geographical limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 41, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.). 
Sec. 22-95. - Determination of necessity; power conferred. 
(a)  It is found and declared that in the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city, or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the code enforcement officer finds that there exist dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes, which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, power is conferred upon the city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
Sec. 22-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.), as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety codes as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by the city, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Code enforcement officer means the officer who is authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.), known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
Municipality means the City of Woodbine, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of such property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having an interest of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the mayor and city council for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the mayor and city council as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or city. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Sec. 22-97. - Procedure for abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer is designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the code enforcement office by any public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the code enforcement officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the code enforcement officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the code enforcement officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(d)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  Date with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the code enforcement officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(e)  The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of such complaint in the municipal court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order showing the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the dwelling, building or structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the dwelling, building or structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the dwelling, building or structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(g)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the code enforcement officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The code enforcement officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(h)  If the code enforcement officer has the dwelling, building or structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the dwelling, building or structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The code enforcement officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
Sec. 22-98. - Establishment of lien. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  The lien provided for in this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the code enforcement officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The city clerk shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by this section unless such costs are waived by resolution of the city. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(d)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(e)  A review of the court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by petition for a writ of certiorari as contemplated in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-3. 
Sec. 22-99. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the manner described in this section. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the code enforcement officer to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the municipal court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4, art. 5; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of the state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of the state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents of the state whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of the state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  If unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and such cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the code enforcement officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
Sec. 22-100. - Standards for determination of nuisances. 
(a)  A finding of noncompliance of any building, fire, health, sanitation, or life safety code regulation or ordinance adopted by the mayor and city council shall constitute prima facie evidence that a public nuisance exists. 
(b)  In addition to specified code violations without limiting the generality of subsection (a) of this section, the following conditions are subject to abatement: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, including improper storage of materials on the premises; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation and disrepair, including those structures which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes such that the external structure and roof have been destroyed or structural members weakened; 
(4)  Sanitation and general uncleanliness, including improper keeping of pets and animals on the premises, and improper disposal of human and animal waste; 
(5)  Accumulation of trash, weeds (having a height of 12 inches or more), debris, junk, filth, standing or stagnant water, and other unsafe conditions; and 
(6)  Vacant, unsecured dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two or more persons in which harmful or offensive physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 13-101) 
Sec. 24-2. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 50 yards of any street, alley, or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other objects. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1985, § 13-102) 
Sec. 24-3. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
See O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
(Code 1985, § 13-103) 
Sec. 24-4. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1985, § 13-104) 
Sec. 24-5. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 13-105) 
Sec. 24-6. - Bonfires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, during a holiday or at any other time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1985, § 13-106) 
Sec. 24-7. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 13-107) 
Sec. 24-8. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 13-110) 
Sec. 24-9. - Theft of service. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
(Code 1985, § 13-111) 
Sec. 24-10. - Theft by shoplifting, theft of private or public property. 
See O.C.G.A. §§ 16-8-14, 16-18-1 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 13-112) 
Sec. 24-11. - Carrying a concealed weapon. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-125.1 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 13-113) 
Sec. 24-12. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Any person convicted of this offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 13-114) 
Sec. 24-13. - Carrying a pistol without a license. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-125.1 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 13-115) 
Sec. 24-14. - Controlled substances. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 13-116) 
Sec. 24-15. - Theft of public utilities. 
See O.C.G.A. §§ 16-8-1 et seq., 16-7-25. 
(Code 1985, § 13-117) 
Sec. 24-16. - Battery. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-5-23. 
(Code 1985, § 13-121) 
Sec. 24-17. - Stalking. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-5-90. 
(Code 1985, § 13-122) 
Sec. 24-18. - Criminal trespass. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-5-21 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 13-123) 
Sec. 24-19. - Obstruction of officer. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-7-87. 
(Code 1985, § 13-124) 
Sec. 24-20. - Giving false name to officer. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-10-25. 
(Code 1985, § 13-125) 
Sec. 24-21. - False report of a crime. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26. 
(Code 1985, § 13-126) 
Sec. 24-22. - Public drunkenness. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(b)  Any person convicted of this offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 13-127) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 24-23. - Disorderly house. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
(Code 1985, § 13-128) 
Sec. 24-24. - Pointing gun or pistol at another. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-102. 
(Code 1985, § 13-129) 
Secs. 24-25—24-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 24-52. - Loud, offensive and disturbing noise prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the control of noise. It is the intent of this article to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and the conduct of business. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue to make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, or injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-301) 
Sec. 24-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Holiday permit shall be the evening before a holiday or the holiday during which the hours for the operation of entertainment in a restaurant, including the bar, which is a part of the restaurant, may be extended by the city council. The permit shall state the period of time that the operation may be extended. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity but does not include the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Plainly audible means any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: 
Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noises, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
Special event permit means a permit issued for special events, including outside entertainment, such as festivals, musical programs, pep rallies, etc. 
(Code 1985, § 6-302) 
Sec. 24-54. - Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Radios, phonographs, and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio, receiving sound device, television, stereo, sound amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quite, and comfort of the adjoining residents or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, or building, in which the machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, television, phonograph, machine, or sound device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Saturday and holidays, in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 500 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(2)  Entertainment noise. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any radio, receiving device, television, stereo, sound amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is located in a building or its exterior, operated as a restaurant including the bar which is part of the restaurant, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday through Saturday and holidays, in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 500 feet from the building or exterior thereof shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. The holidays include: New Year's Eve, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, and Labor Day and the evening before such holiday, providing the day is not a Sunday. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on or adjacent to public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, church, dwelling, motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale. 
(5)  Sound track. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers located on a truck or other moving or standing vehicle for advertising or other commercial purposes. The use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during hours and in places and with volume which is plainly audible at a distance of 500 feet without a city permit. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the governmental entity while engaged in necessary public business; 
(2)  A public event sponsored by a governmental entity or a charitable nonprofit corporation, civic organization, church group or other group possessing a permit issued for such an event by the city; 
(3)  A holiday event in a restaurant, including the bar, which is part of the restaurant, for which a permit has been issued by the city council. An application shall be filed at least 21 days prior to the holiday event with the city administrator; 
(4)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, or other governmental unit at night when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; or 
(5)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character during daylight hours or a public event. 
(Code 1985, § 6-303) 
Sec. 24-55. - Standard for determining violations. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of this article exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of noise; 
(2)  The intensity of the noise; 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(7)  The zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
(9)  The duration of the noise; 
(10)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(11)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Code 1985, § 6-304) 
Sec. 24-56. - Enforcement. 
The county sheriff and his deputies, and all other law enforcement officers, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial; shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged; shall have any identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court; shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service; and shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves it. 
(Code 1985, § 6-305) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Parks authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Riverwalk. 
The city, in connection with the ISTEA Project, recently completed the paving of the walkway and construction of the riverwalk. The city council wishes to make the said walkway from West 4th Street to the new riverwalk a no skateboard zone so that the said walkway and riverwalk will be for the use and enjoyment of the citizens of the city and visitors to the city. 
(1)  The walkway and riverwalk is declared to be a no skateboard zone with same to be clearly marked as such by signs to be posted by the city. 
(2)  No bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades or any other non-handicap-type vehicle shall be allowed on the riverwalk at any time. 
(3)  Anyone found guilty of violating this chapter may be fined up to $500.00 or dealt with by proper authorities if the violator is a minor. 
(Code 1985, § 12-103) 
Secs. 26-2—26-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 26-22. - Use of grounds and facilities in general. 
Each person, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(1)) 
Sec. 26-23. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using such parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any foundation, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters; 
(2)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof; 
(3)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any other animal; 
(4)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles so provided, or all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
(5)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language; 
(6)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act; 
(7)  Engage in fighting; 
(8)  Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park; 
(9)  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the park and recreation board; 
(10)  Prevent any person from using any park or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this article and with the rules applicable to such use; 
(11)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; or 
(12)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(2)) 
Sec. 26-24. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and it shall be unlawful for any persons, other than city personnel conducting city business therein, to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(b)  Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the director of public works at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(3)) 
Sec. 26-25. - Group activity. 
Whenever more than ten members of any group, association, or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, or theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association, or organization shall first obtain a permit from the city administrator or city staff for such purpose. The city administrator or city staff shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association, or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the said group, association, or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the city administrator or city staff. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(4)) 
Sec. 26-26. - Picnic areas and use. 
No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(5)) 
Sec. 26-27. - Other regulations. 
(a)  Games. It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving throwing or otherwise propelling objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(b)  Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon, or the like. 
(c)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, or attempt to build, a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director of public works. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other flammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(d)  Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash, or otherwise completely under the control of the owner. 
(e)  Automobiles. It shall be unlawful to park any automobile except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(f)  Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody, or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
(h)  Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect, or cause to be erected, any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1985, § 12-102(6)) 
Chapter 28 - PERSONNEL 

Sec. 28-1. - Introduction. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these personnel policies, rules, and general procedures, together with the position classification and pay plan, is to provide the fundamental features for an effective system of personnel administration for the city. 
(b)  Administration. The city administrator is responsible for administering these policies. 
(c)  Employees covered. These personnel policies and procedures apply to all employees of the city unless specifically excluded by these policies and procedures or by other city ordinances. 
(d)  Policy changes. These policies shall reflect, and be superseded by, any changes mandated by state or federal legislation. 
(Code 1985, § 3-901) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means the right of an applicant or employee to appear before the city council to be heard on matters of discrimination, unfair practices or other grievances of such person in the manner prescribed in these policies and procedures. 
Classification and pay plan means the system of assigning jobs to classes and to appropriate pay grades based on the similarities of positions. 
Classified service means the classified service consists of all positions included in the classification and pay plan with the exception of those positions specifically excluded by the mayor and city council. 
Continuous service means employment that is uninterrupted except for authorized leaves of absence, suspension, or separation due to a reduction in work force. 
Demotion means a change in the rank of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a lower minimum starting salary and less discretion and/or responsibility. 
Department head means the position with overall administrative responsibility for a department. 
Dismissal means the termination of a regular employee for just cause. 
Eligible means a person who has made a passing score on any examination required under these regulations and who has qualified to be employed by the city. 
Employee means a person appointed to a position in the city government for which he is compensated on a full time or part time basis. 
Grievance means any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of these personnel policies and procedures or any decision relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or charge of discrimination. 
Layoff means the separation of an employee from the classified service due to lack of work, lack of funds, abolishment of the position, or for other material changes in duties or organization. 
Merit increase means an increase in pay based on an employee's job performance. 
Overtime time means worked in excess of the regular work schedule for the position in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Part-time employee means an employee who works on a continuing basis, but does not work a full or normal work period. 
Performance evaluation means a method of evaluating each employee on a periodic basis as to his performance on the job. 
Probationary employee means an employee serving the first year of his appointment, promotion, re-employment, or reinstatement to any position in the classified service. A probationary employee is not a regular employee until completion of the one-year probationary period. 
Promotion means a change in rank of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a higher minimum salary and carrying a greater scope of discretion and responsibility. 
Promotion list means a list of persons who have been found qualified for appointment to a higher position. They may be qualified either by a written examination or other evaluation technique. 
Provisional employee means an employee appointed to a position without competition pending the establishment of an eligibility list. A provisional employee may serve for a limited time only and must compete with other applicants to qualify for a probationary appointment, if applicable. 
Public hearing means a meeting of the mayor and city council, open to the public, at which any interested party may appear and be heard. 
Regular employee means an employee who has completed the probationary period. 
Reprimand means a formal means of communicating to an employee that a problem exists and that it must be corrected. 
Resignation means the termination of an employee at the employee's request. 
Salary increase means an increase in salary within the salary range prescribed for the class by the classification and pay plan. 
Suspension means an enforced leave of absence for either a disciplinary purpose or a pending investigation of charges against an employee. 
(Code 1985, § 3-902) 
Sec. 28-3. - Position classification and pay plan. 
(a)  Establishment. The city administrator shall be responsible for developing, maintaining and administering a position classification and pay plan covering all employees in the classified service of the city. Such plan shall be approved and amended by recommendation of the mayor and city council, and shall constitute the official approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes and pay scales. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Class means a group of positions (or one position) that: 
(1)  Has similar duties and responsibilities; 
(2)  Requires like qualification; and 
(3)  Can be equitably compensated by the same salary range. 
Class title means the official designation or name of the class as stated in the job description. The class title shall be used on all personnel records and actions. Different working or office titles may be used for purposes of internal administration. 
Position means a group of currently-assigned duties and responsibilities requiring the full or part-time employment of one person. A position may be occupied or vacant. 
Reclassification means the assignment of an existing position from one class to a different class due to a significant change in duties or responsibilities. 
To allocate a position means assigning the position to an appropriate class on the basis of the similarity of work performed and level of responsibility inherent in the position. 
(c)  Allocation of positions. 
(1)  Initial allocation. The city administrator shall be responsible for the initial allocation of the position of every employee of the city to one of the classes in the plan. 
(2)  New positions. When a new position is established and approved by the mayor and city council, the department head involved shall complete a position description covering the duties and responsibilities of such new position. The city administrator shall allocate the position to one of the classes in the classification plan, unless a suitable class does not exist, in which case the city administrator shall recommend that the mayor and city council establish a new class. Upon the recommendation and approval of such new class by the mayor and city council, the city administrator shall allocate the new position to it. 
(3)  Allocation appeals. If an employee has reason to believe that his position has been improperly allocated, such employee may, with the knowledge of the department head, request the city administrator to review the allocation of such position. Any such request must be submitted in writing and contain a statement of justification. If not resolved to the employee's satisfaction, the employee may appeal to the city council. 
(d)  Maintenance of plan. 
(1)  Vacancies. Each time a vacancy occurs, the department head shall submit a description of the vacant position to the city administrator for a review of the allocation of the position. The city administrator may waive this requirement for cases in which he has determined that no material changes have occurred. 
(2)  Departmental reorganization. Each time a department or division under the jurisdiction of a department head is significantly reorganized, such department head shall submit to the city administrator new position descriptions for all affected positions. 
(3)  Changes in duties of position. The city administrator may require departments or employees to submit position descriptions on a periodic basis or at any time he has reason to believe that there has been a significant change in the duties and responsibilities of one or more positions. 
(4)  New and abolished positions. Each time a new position is established, a position description shall be written and incorporated into the existing plan. Likewise, an abolished position may be deleted from the classification plan. 
(e)  Interpretation of job descriptions. The job descriptions are descriptive and not restrictive. The use of a particular description as to duties, qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others. 
(f)  Official copy of the plan. The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining an official copy of the position classification and pay plan. The official copy shall include a list of class titles and job descriptions, plus all amendments. A copy of the official plan shall be available for inspection by the public under reasonable conditions during business hours. 
(g)  Amendments to the plan. When there is a need for the establishment of new positions or the abolition of current positions, the city administrator shall submit findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council, which shall take such action as deemed appropriate. All changes in the position classification and pay plan shall be in the form of amendments to the plan approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-903) 
Sec. 28-4. - Rate of pay. 
(a)  New appointees. New employees shall be paid the minimum rate of pay for the class to which they are assigned, subject to the following exceptions which require the approval of the city administrator and/or the mayor and city council. 
(1)  If an appointee to a particular position does not meet the minimum qualifications stated in the job description or if certain classes of work require a formalized training period which is of unusual duration, and the needs of the city can best be met by placing an individual in a training capacity, the city administrator may designate such position as a trainee position. Appointment to a trainee position shall be at a salary range below the minimum rate established for the classification. 
(2)  If an appointee exceeds the minimum qualifications for the position, such employee may be started at a rate up to four steps above the starting salary for the classification. Written approval of the city administrator is required in such instances. 
(3)  If an employee to be appointed possesses special qualifications, or extenuating circumstances exist, the department head may recommend to the city administrator a rate higher than four steps above the starting salary for the classification. In such cases, the mayor and city council must grant final approval. 
(b)  Promotion. 
(1)  An employee shall be promoted when: 
a.  The employee is transferred to a position classified in a higher pay range. 
b.  The employee's position is reclassified to a classification having a higher pay range. 
(2)  Promotions may occur within a department or between departments. 
(3)  Pay upon promotion. At the time an employee is promoted to a previously established position in a classification with a higher pay range, a salary increase may be granted: 
a.  Up to ten percent above the employee's current salary; or 
b.  Up to the minimum of the new classification, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Demotion. 
(1)  An employee shall be demoted when: 
a.  The employee is placed in a different classification having a lower pay range. 
b.  The employee's position is reclassified to a classification having a lower pay range. 
(2)  When an employee receives a demotion of the type stated in subsection (c)(1)a of this section, such employee's pay may remain unchanged or may be reduced at the discretion of the city administrator. 
(d)  Reinstated employees. A reinstated employee shall be paid at a salary rate within the approved salary range for the position to which the employee is reinstated. The rate of salary at appointment shall be in accordance with subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(e)  Part-time and temporary employment. Pay for part time and temporary employment shall be the hourly rate of pay for full-time employment in similar positions. 
(f)  Overtime. Overtime is work beyond the normal hours of any scheduled work week as authorized by the department head, subject to the approval of the city administrator. Compensation for overtime will be in accordance with the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended, and shall be calculated on actual hours worked, and shall not include any leave hours. 
(1)  Compensatory time may be granted in lieu of payment for overtime hours at a rate of 1½ times the amount of actual hours worked. Approval of the department head and city administrator must be obtained prior to earning compensatory time. The maximum accumulation of compensatory time shall not exceed 80 hours and must be used within ten pay periods of the date earned. The taking of compensatory time shall be governed by the same procedures as outlined in section 28-16. 
(2)  All hours worked which are subject to compensatory time shall be shown on the time card for that period. In addition, an annual compensatory time log in a format approved by the city administrator shall be maintained for every employee, including department heads, and copy furnished to the city bookkeeper with the last time card for each month. 
(g)  Increases in salaries. Increases in pay for the city employees shall be governed by the following principles: 
(1)  Any employee shall be initially employed for a probationary period of one year. 
(2)  The pay plan consists of a number of pay grades. The mayor and city council may add, change, or delete pay grades as deemed necessary. 
(3)  Each pay grade shall have a pay range with an entry rate and steps placed at approximately 2½ percent intervals. The range between the entry rate and the maximum rate is approximately 50 percent. 
(4)  After an employee reaches the maximum rate within a pay grade, such employee shall only be entitled to across-the-board salary adjustments and merit payments in bonus form. 
(5)  Each department head shall file an annual performance evaluation report on each employee within that department. This report shall become a permanent part of each employee's personnel file. 
(6)  In order for an employee to receive a merit increase, the following are required: 
a.  Performance evaluation for current fiscal year. 
b.  Recommendation by the department head. 
c.  Recommendation by the city administrator. 
(7)  In order to move to a higher pay grade, an employee must apply for a new position within a higher pay grade or be an incumbent in a position which has been reclassified to a higher pay grade. 
(8)  Annually, the mayor and city council may consider increasing the salaries within all pay grades on an equal percentage basis. During budget hearings, the mayor and city council shall determine what percentage increase, if any, will be allotted for increases to employee salaries. The percentage for cost-of-living pay increases will change the entry rate, steps and maximum rate for each pay grade of the salary schedule. 
(9)  Merit increases. 
a.  Merit increases may be granted upon the recommendation of the department head, and upon the approval of the city administrator, if funds for that purpose are available in the approved budget. Employees shall be eligible for merit increases annually until the maximum pay rate for the classification has been reached. 
b.  Merit increases are not to be granted for simply meeting job requirements. The function of a merit increase is to recognize exceptional performance above and beyond the requirements of the job. 
(10)  Employees below the top step of their grade, whose work is exceptional, may be granted a special merit increase to the next step after serving at least three months in the current step, upon the approval of the city administrator, if funds for that purpose are available in the approved budget. Only one special merit increase per 12-month period may be granted. A special merit increase disqualifies the employee from being considered for a yearly merit step increase. 
(Code 1985, § 3-904) 
Sec. 28-5. - Application and examinations. 
(a)  Announcement of vacant positions. Except as otherwise provided below, all vacancies in the classified service shall be publicized by posting announcements in the office of the city administrator. The announcements shall specify the titles and salary ranges of the vacant positions, qualification requirements, manner of making application and other pertinent information, and shall specify the date, time and place of examinations, if required, for the positions. Applications will be accepted for at least ten days following the announcement by the city administrator. 
(b)  Application forms. All applicants for positions in the classified service of the city shall submit an application to the city administrator. All applicants shall provide proof of citizenship as required by federal law. Such forms shall require information concerning training, experience, and other pertinent information, and shall be signed by the applicant. No person shall be employed by the city unless and until such person has made application with the city administrator. 
(c)  Employment requirements. All positions in the classified service shall be open only to persons who meet such requirements as are listed on the public announcement of the examination. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to, the following factors: experience, education and training. 
(d)  Receipt and duration of applications. Applications from all persons desiring employment with the city shall be accepted during regular business hours and placed on file. Applicants must complete a new application for each announced position vacancy. 
(e)  Rejection of applications. The city administrator may reject an application which indicates that the applicant is deficient in any or all of the requirements as specified in the public announcement of the vacancy. An applicant may also be rejected for fraud or deception in the completion of the application, or if his past record of employment is determined to be unsatisfactory by the city administrator. 
(f)  Open competitive appointments. Positions to be filled by recruitment from outside the classified service shall be filled through a competitive process open to the public. This process may include, but shall not be limited to, ratings of training and experience; job-related tests; or any combination of these as determined by the city administrator. Factors such as education, job-related qualifications, attitude and experience may be taken into account in making employment decisions. The city administrator may require the applicant to submit proof of education and military service or any other such documentation as is deemed necessary. 
(g)  Promotional appointments. Promotional appointments shall be open to all employees who meet the training and experience requirements included in the position description or who have an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the required knowledge, skills and abilities. 
(Code 1985, § 3-905) 
Sec. 28-6. - Appointments. 
(a)  Initial appointments. All employees of the city shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the appropriate department head and approval of the city administrator. 
(b)  Types of appointments. When initially hired, employees shall be given one of the following types of appointment: 
(1)  Probationary. A probationary appointment is an appointment to a position in the classified service. An employee serving a probationary period may be discharged or returned to his previous position at the discretion of the department head and shall not have the right to utilize the grievance and appeal procedure set forth in this policy. 
(2)  Provisional. A provisional appointment may be made only after applications for the position have been taken and no qualified applicant has been found. 
a.  When there is need to fill a vacancy and no qualified applicant is available, a provisional appointment may be made. 
b.  No provisional appointment shall be continued for more than three months from the date of appointment, unless, due to extenuating circumstances, an extension is approved by the city administrator. 
(3)  Temporary. Temporary appointments may be made to fill positions which are authorized and established for a specified period of time, when the work of a department requires the services of one or more employees on a seasonal or intermittent basis, or in cases of emergency. Temporary appointments shall not exceed 120 calendar days; however, extensions to such appointments may be granted by the mayor and city council. 
(4)  Regular appointments. A classified employee given an initial probationary appointment shall automatically become permanent upon successful completion of the probationary period. 
(Code 1985, § 3-906) 
Sec. 28-7. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Objective. The probationary period shall be one year in duration and no employee shall have a property interest in his position during the probationary period. During an employee's probationary period, the employee may be released or returned to his previous position without notice. 
(b)  Duration. The probationary period shall be one year in duration. 
(c)  Promotional appointments. The probationary period shall be used in connection with promotional appointments in the same manner as it is used for initial appointments. If a person is removed during the probationary period following a promotion, such person shall be entitled to general reemployment rights in his former class. 
(d)  Interruption of probationary period. If an employee is laid off during a probationary period and such person is subsequently reappointed in the same department, he may be given credit for the portion of the probationary period completed before the layoff. 
(e)  Demotion during probationary period. A department head may, with the approval of the city administrator, demote an employee during the probationary period. A written report of such demotion must be filed with the city administrator within three days after the effective date of the demotion. 
(f)  Notice. Prior to the expiration of the employee's probationary period, the department head shall notify the city administrator in writing of whether or not the employee has successfully completed the probationary period. Failure to send such a notice within five working days of the expiration date of the probationary period shall be construed as successful completion of the probationary period. 
(Code 1985, § 3-907) 
Sec. 28-8. - Promotion and transfers. 
(a)  Announcement of vacant positions for internal hire. It shall be the policy of the city to fill vacancies in the classified service, as far as practicable, by promotion. To this end, internal announcements may be posted and applications from current employees accepted as directed by the city administrator. This policy places no restrictions on the city administrator's decision to hire internally or externally. 
(b)  Political or partisan endorsement prohibited. Promotions to positions in the classified service shall be based upon merit and fitness for promotion only. No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement. 
(c)  Intra-departmental transfers. The appropriate department head may, with the prior approval of the city administrator, transfer an employee in the classified service under his jurisdiction from one position to another within the same class and within the same department. 
(d)  Inter-departmental transfers. A transfer of an employee from one department to another shall require the approval of both department heads concerned and the city administrator. Requests for such transfer shall show how the employee concerned meets the qualification requirements of the class to which the transfer is proposed. 
(e)  Pay grade after transfer. An employee who is transferred shall continue at the same rate of pay unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1985, § 3-908) 
Sec. 28-9. - Employee performance evaluation. 
(a)  Objective. The purpose of the employee performance evaluation shall be primarily to inform employees of how well they are performing their work and how they can improve their work performance. Such performance evaluation may also be used in determining merit raises, as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer or dismissal, and for such other purposes as set forth in these policies. The city administrator shall provide the format and guidelines for the formal and informal evaluations. 
(b)  Period of evaluation. All employees, except temporary workers, shall be formally evaluated annually. An employee shall not be eligible for a merit pay raise until the performance evaluation form has been completely processed. Employees shall also be evaluated at the time of separation. Evaluation dates will be established by the city administrator. A signed copy of the evaluation will be provided to the employee within 30 days of the established evaluation date. 
(c)  Evaluations. 
(1)  Formal. Formal evaluations shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee and reviewed by the department head and city administrator. 
(2)  Informal. At the six-month point in the evaluation cycle, informal evaluations shall be prepared in the same manner as the annual evaluations. These informal evaluations will not become part of an employee's personnel record, but will be maintained on file by the department head and a copy will be maintained by the city administrator. These informal evaluations and copies will be maintained until the next informal evaluation is completed and then they are to be destroyed. The purpose of these informal evaluations is to provide feedback and allow for counselling in an informal setting; provide an opportunity for recognition of good performance or to assess progress, problems and goals. 
(d)  Review with employees. The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated. If an employee disagrees with statement in an evaluation, such employee may submit, within ten days following the conference with his supervisor, a written statement which shall be attached to the evaluation form and forwarded to the city administrator. 
(e)  Performance evaluations. Confidential performance evaluations shall be confidential and shall be made available only to the employee evaluated, the employee's department head, the city administrator and the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-909) 
Sec. 28-10. - Separations. 
(a)  Types of separation from the classified service. Separations from positions in the classified service shall be designated as one of the following: 
(1)  Resignation. 
(2)  Abandonment of job. 
(3)  Layoff or reduction in force. 
(4)  Inability to perform the essential functions of the position even the reasonable accommodation. 
(5)  Loss of a job requirement necessary to perform the essential functions of the position. 
(6)  Dismissal or discharge. 
(7)  Retirement. 
(8)  Death. 
(b)  Resignation. An employee shall submit to the department head written notice of resignation at least 14 days in advance of the date of resignation. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of resignation, the department head shall forward the same to the city administrator. Failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service record of the employee. 
(c)  Abandonment of job. 
(1)  An employee, not on authorized leave of absence, who fails to report for work for three consecutive days may be terminated from the service of the city for job abandonment. 
(2)  Any employee terminated for job abandonment shall have the right of appeal to the city council in the manner set forth in section 28-12. 
(d)  Layoff or reduction in force. Any involuntary separation not related to an employee's conduct shall constitute a layoff or reduction in force. 
(1)  Reasons for. Any employee may be laid off because of shortage of funds or work, abolishment of the position, material changes in the duties or organization, or related reasons beyond the employee's control which do not reflect dissatisfaction with the service of the employee. The duties previously performed by any laid-off employee may be reassigned to other employees holding positions in appropriate classes. 
(2)  Notice to department head. Whenever the layoff of any employee shall become necessary, the city administrator shall notify the department head at least 15 calendar days in advance of the intended action, of the necessity for such layoff and the reasons therefor. The department head shall thereupon recommend to the city administrator the names and job titles of the employees to be laid off and the order in which such layoff shall be affected. 
(3)  Order of layoff. Should it become necessary to reduce the number of employees within a given class in any department, such employees shall be laid off on the basis of the following two factors to be weighted equally: length of service in class and length of service with the city. If an employee believes that an error has been made in determining layoff order, he may request an administrative review by the city administrator. 
(4)  Special cases. Should a department head determine that the retention of a certain employee is essential to effective operation because of the fact that such employee possesses special skills or ability, and should the department head wish to retain such employee in preference to another with a higher rating, then the department head shall submit a written request to the city administrator. Such notification shall set forth in detail the specific skills and abilities possessed by the employee and the reasons why such employee is essential to effective operation. With the approval of the mayor and city council, the individual may be retained. 
(5)  Notice to employees. Regular employees to be laid off shall be notified in writing by the city administrator at least 14 calendar days prior to the effective date of the layoff. 
(6)  Demotions. Any regular employee scheduled to be laid off shall have the right to be demoted to a lower classification, provided that a vacancy exists and such employee is qualified to fill the position in the lower classification. 
(7)  Reemployment list. Former employees who were separated from the city service by layoff and desire to be considered for reemployment with the city will be placed on the reemployment list. Such persons may remain on the reemployment list for a period not to exceed one year. 
a.  Former employees will be listed by seniority in terms of service as defined in this section and will be offered reemployment for the first vacancy that becomes available in the same classification in which they were employed at the time of separation. All employees appointed to a position in this manner will serve the stated probationary period for that position; if said employee does not complete the probationary period he will be separated from the city service without the right of appeal. 
b.  A person on the reemployment list may voluntarily accept a position at a lower classification level than his former position. 
c.  If a person placed on the reemployment list does not accept the first offer for reemployment in a position having the same classification as the one held at the time of separation, he will be removed from the reemployment list. Such persons will no longer have guarantee of reemployment rights when a vacancy occurs, but may be considered for reemployment on the same basis as other applicants. 
(e)  Inability to perform. If an employee suffers from a physical or mental disability which prevents him from performing the essential functions of the position, even with reasonable accommodation, the employee is subject to termination for inability to perform the job. The employee will cooperate with the employer to determine the limitations imposed by the disability and to design accommodation for the essential functions of the job. Termination due to an inability to perform essential functions shall be subject to an appeal pursuant to section 28-12. 
(f)  Loss of job requirements. Any employee who is unable to perform the essential functions of his job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other necessary requirement may be separated from employment based upon recommendation of the department head and approval of the city administrator. 
(g)  Dismissals. Dismissals shall constitute discharges or separations for just cause and shall be governed by the provisions of section 28-11. 
(h)  Retirement. The retirement of an employee shall consist of the voluntary separation of an employee who has met the requirements of age and length of service under the laws governing any applicable pension fund of which such employee may be a member. 
(i)  Death. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death of the employee. All compensation, including annual leave pay, due to such employee, as of the effective date of separation, shall be paid to the beneficiary of the employee, the surviving spouse of such employee, or to the estate of such employee, as may be determined by law or by the applicable executed documents in the personnel folder of such employee. 
(Code 1985, § 3-910) 
Sec. 28-11. - Disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Intent. Effective supervision and good employee relations should reduce to a minimum those instances necessitating disciplinary action. The establishment of rules and regulations and the imposition of disciplinary action for a violation thereof are not intended to restrict the rights of any employee, but are for the purpose of ensuring the rights of all and for securing cooperation and orderliness throughout the classified service. The severity of the disciplinary action imposed should be related to the gravity of the offense, the employee's record of disciplinary action and the disciplinary action imposed in similar cases. Any disciplinary action imposed shall be for just cause. The city will not allow discrimination against any employee because of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, disability or political affiliation. 
(b)  Conduct subject to disciplinary action. The following actions shall constitute just cause for disciplinary action but the imposition of disciplinary action shall not be limited to the offenses set forth: 
(1)  The conviction of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Excessive absenteeism. 
(3)  Absence without leave, or failure to report after the expiration of a leave of absence. 
(4)  Excessive tardiness. 
(5)  Abuse of sick leave. 
(6)  Insubordination or serious breach of proper discipline. 
(7)  Inefficiency or incompetency. 
(8)  Abuse or theft of city property. 
(9)  The borrowing of city equipment for personal use without prior official permission. 
(10)  The loss of a job requirement, such as the loss of a necessary license, which prevents the adequate performance of the essential functions of the position. 
(11)  The willful making of false statements to supervisors, officials, the public, boards, commissions or agencies. 
(12)  The violation of city ordinances, administrative regulations, departmental rules, or these rules and regulations. 
(13)  The consumption, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages and/or illegal substances while at work, or being intoxicated on the job, or being otherwise affected on the job because of the prior use of some illegal substance. 
(14)  The discovery of a false statement in an application. 
(15)  Acceptance of gratuities in conflict with state law or city ordinance. 
(16)  Engaging in offensive conduct or using offensive language toward the public, supervisory personnel or fellow employees. 
(17)  Harassment on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, citizenship, age, or disability. 
(c)  Types of disciplinary action. A department head, subject to the employee's right of appeal, as provided in section 28-12, shall have the following alternatives when disciplining an employee: 
(1)  Reprimand. 
a.  Oral reprimand. An oral reprimand is a progressive disciplinary measure which may be issued for an incident, action or behavior which does not warrant more severe disciplinary action. In the oral reprimand, the supervisor will verbally and privately explain to the employee that he is being reprimanded, describe the problem and indicate what must be done to correct the problem. 
b.  Written reprimand. Where the incident, action, or behavior of the employee is such as not to initially warrant a more severe type of disciplinary action, a written reprimand may be issued for first or second offences, including, but not limited to, unauthorized absence from duty (for less than three days), abuse of sick leave privileges, frequent unexcused tardiness, inattention to duty, insubordination, improper conduct, or loss or destruction of city property. Written reprimands shall be issued by the department head to the affected employee and a copy of same shall be forwarded to the city administrator and filed in the personnel folder of such employee. 
(2)  Suspension. 
a.  A department head may, with the approval of the city administrator, suspend without pay any employee under his supervision for a period of not less than one or more than ten working days. 
b.  A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for such action and the length of time of such suspension shall be furnished by the department head to the affected employee, and a copy of same shall be sent to the city administrator and filed in the personnel folder of such employee within one working day of the effective date of the action. 
c.  An employee may be suspended for a period longer than ten working days upon the express approval of the city administrator. The city administrator shall, within one working day of the decision, furnish a written statement to the affected employee advising the employee of the length of and the reason for the suspension. 
d.  When an employee has been accused of serious misconduct or criminal behavior, the employee may be suspended with pay for a period of five days, during which the city administrator will conduct or have conducted an investigation to determine whether the pending charges will affect the employee's job performance or whether the conduct which resulted in the arrest is the basis for disciplinary action. Where the city administrator determines that an employee's return to work would not be in the best interests of the city, the employee will be given notice of his proposed indefinite suspension without pay, including the reasons for the suspension, and the employee will be given an opportunity to respond to the city administrator concerning those reasons. After the employee has had an opportunity to respond, the city administrator will issue a decision on the indefinite suspension. 
(3)  Demotion. 
a.  For just cause, a department head may reduce the salary of a regular employee within the range provided in the pay plan or demote the employee to a lower graded position. The department head shall take such action only after approval by the city administrator. 
b.  A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for any such action shall be furnished by the department head to the affected employee, and a copy of same shall be forwarded to the city administrator and filed in the personnel folder of such employee within one working day of the effective date of the action. 
(4)  Dismissal. 
a.  When a regular employee is charged with misconduct that serves as just cause for dismissal, the department head shall place the employee on a three-day, paid administrative suspension with a recommendation for dismissal. 
b.  A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for suspension with a recommendation for dismissal shall be furnished by the person proposing the dismissal to the affected employee, and to the city administrator, prior to the suspension. 
c.  The city administrator shall ensure that a written notice of the charges has been furnished to the affected employee and shall conduct an investigation to ensure that the charges are substantiated and that no errors relevant to the charges were made. 
d.  Within three working days of the affected employee being notified of all charges, the city administrator shall hold a conference at which the employee shall be authorized to present information which is pertinent to the charges on his behalf. 
e.  The city administrator shall render a decision on the proposal for dismissal based on all of the relevant information. 
f.  The city administrator shall advise the employee of his right to appeal the decision under the grievance procedures. 
(5)  Notification of right of appeal. Any written notification submitted to a regular employee who is being subjected to disciplinary action shall set forth the right of the employee to appeal such action to the city council in the manner set forth in section 28-12. Oral and written reprimands are not grievable actions. 
(Code 1985, § 3-911) 
Sec. 28-12. - Grievance and appeal procedures. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  City employee grievances should receive prompt consideration and equitable resolution. Wherever possible, grievances should be resolved or adjusted informally, and both supervisors and employees shall be expected to make every effort to do so. With respect to those grievances which cannot be so resolved, employees shall be entitled to process the grievances as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  These procedures governing the processing of grievances and providing the right of appeal are established for the purpose of eliminating or correcting justifiable complaints or dissatisfaction of regular employees or certain complaints of probationary employees and applicants (see subsection (b) of this section); ensuring that all employees shall be afforded fair, equitable and expeditious review of their grievances without fear, coercion or discrimination; and providing a systematic and orderly method for resolving complaints and differences between employees and supervisory or management personnel. 
(b)  Procedure for grievance resolution. Any regular employee in the classified service who has been demoted, suspended, dismissed or subjected to any other type of disciplinary action (except oral or written reprimand), or who is aggrieved as a result of the interpretation and application of these rules and regulations, and any applicant or employee (regular or probationary) who has been subjected to any alleged discriminatory action that is prohibited by federal law, shall have the right to utilize the grievance and appeal procedure hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  A formal grievance shall not be initiated unless and until the employee has discussed the grievance with the department head and city administrator or in the case of an applicant, with the city administrator. Such discussion shall be held within ten working days after the employee becomes aware of the occurrence of a grievable matter. The department head, or city administrator, in the case of an applicant, shall render a decision on the matter within ten working days after the grievance has been discussed. 
(2)  Should the employee or applicant not be satisfied with the decision of the department head or city administrator, the employ or applicant, within five working days, shall state the grievance in writing and file a standard grievance form with the city administrator setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The city administrator shall make appropriate inquiries; consider all facts surrounding the action, and make effort to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction of the department head and the employee, or the applicant. 
(3)  Should no decision resulting in the settlement of the grievance be reached within ten working days after the filing of the written grievance, the employee or applicant, within five working days, may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be submitted through the city administrator and shall be accompanied by all of the facts and information concerned with the grievance as well as any written responses of the department head. 
(4)  The city council shall, within 15 working days after the receipt of an appeal, hold a hearing upon same and consider the action complained of in the grievance. 
a.  Whenever possible, the hearing shall be scheduled during normal working hours and employees, supervisors, applicants and their representatives and witnesses shall have the right to appear before the council for the purpose of presenting facts, information and relevant evidence. 
b.  At the hearing before the city council, technical rules of evidence shall not apply. All testimony before the council shall be under oath or affirmation. Any member of the council shall have the power to administer oaths and call witnesses and may compel the production of relevant books, records and documents. 
c.  A copy of the decision of the city council shall be given to the affected employee and the department head of same, or to the applicant, within three working days following the completion of the hearing. 
(5)  The failure of supervisory employees to follow the steps outlined above shall result in conferring upon the employee the right automatically to proceed to the next step in the grievance procedure. The failure of the employee to follow the steps outlined above may result in the dismissal of the grievance at any step. 
(6)  In those cases where dismissal of an employee is involved, the city administrator shall immediately notify the affected employee that, if requested, a hearing before the city council will be set up and held within 15 working days of the action taken. At all such hearings, the department head shall be required to appear and explain the reasons for the dismissal. 
(7)  No punitive, discriminatory or adverse action shall be taken against any employee or applicant on account of the filing of a grievance or an appeal. 
(Code 1985, § 3-912) 
Sec. 28-13. - Employee development. 
The city administrator shall be responsible for fostering and promoting in-service training of employees for the purpose of improving the quality of service and to assist employees in preparing themselves for advancement. 
(Code 1985, § 3-913) 
Sec. 28-14. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Personnel transactions. All appointments, separations, and other personnel transactions shall be recorded on forms provided by the city administrator. A separate file folder shall be prepared and maintained for each employee and shall contain the original or a copy of all pertinent documents. 
(b)  Public inspection. Information relative to employees and former employees shall be available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18. 
(c)  Destruction of records. Employee service records shall be kept in accordance with state and federal regulations after termination of employment. Such records may be kept in their original form or in any other duplicate form the city administrator deems appropriate. All other records, including correspondence, applications and examinations may be destroyed after two years. 
(d)  Attendance records. Regular attendance reports shall be prepared and submitted by each department head in the form designated by the city administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 3-914) 
Sec. 28-15. - Payroll. 
(a)  Initial appointments. Upon the appointment of any employee to the classified service, the city administrator shall submit to the mayor and city council such information, if any, as is necessary to certify the employment status, title or position and salary or wage of such employee. 
(b)  Payroll adjustments. 
(1)  Each department head shall be responsible for immediately notifying the city administrator of any occurrences or actions taken which require an adjustment in the salary or wage of any employee or employees under the supervision of such department head. 
(2)  Upon receipt of such notice or upon the taking of any action by the mayor and city council that requires an adjustment in the salary or wage of any employees, the city administrator shall make such payroll adjustments for such employees as may be required. 
(c)  Recovery of salaries. Improperly paid officers and employees may be held liable for the return of salaries improperly, accidentally or illegally paid to employees. 
(d)  Voluntary deductions. The city shall be authorized to provide for automatic payroll deductions for employees. The number, type and minimum duration of payroll deductions will be established, and may be changed, by the city administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 3-915) 
Sec. 28-16. - Attendance and leave. 
(a)  Hours of work. The established work week and the hours of work shall, insofar as practicable, be uniform within occupational groups and shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the city and the reasonable needs of the public who may be required to do business with various city departments. The work schedule for each department shall be established by the department head with the advice and approval of the city administrator. 
(b)  Attendance. Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all persons in his department. The city administrator shall keep complete attendance and other records on each employee, including annual leave, sick leave, overtime, and others, as provided in section 28-14. 
(c)  Holidays. All full-time employees shall be eligible for holiday leave for the following days and other days as designated by specific action of the mayor and city council: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  MLK Jr. Day. 
(3)  Presidents' Day. 
(4)  Good Friday. 
(5)  Memorial Day. 
(6)  Independence Day. 
(7)  Labor Day. 
(8)  Columbus Day. 
(9)  Veterans' Day. 
(10)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(11)  Day after Thanksgiving Day. 
(12)  Christmas Eve. 
(13)  Christmas Day. 
(14)  Day after Christmas Day. 
a.  The city administrator will set the holidays by date and cause the city clerk to post and distribute the listing prior to the start of each calendar year. An employee who is not on approved leave and fails to report on his scheduled work day before or after a holiday shall not be paid for the holiday. 
b.  Holidays which occur during annual or sick leave shall not be charged against annual or sick leave. Permanent employees shall be paid for holidays based on the number of hours they normally work each day, exclusive of overtime. Temporary employees will not be paid for holidays not worked. 
c.  Any essential employee scheduled to work on an official city holiday shall be paid at 1½ times the regular rate for each hour worked during the actual holiday or be given compensatory time at a rate of 1½ times the amount of hours actually worked as decided by the department head. Public safety employees are an exception to this rule and will be governed by the Fair Labor Standards Act and established work schedules. 
(d)  Annual (vacation) leave. 
(1)  General. Vacations are for the purpose of rejuvenating both physical and mental faculties and all employees are urged to avail themselves of vacation periods. 
(2)  Eligibility. All regular or permanent employees in the classified service shall be entitled to earn and accrue annual leave. Permanent part-time employees shall be entitled to annual leave in proportion to the number of hours worked. Temporary employees shall not be eligible for annual leave. 
(3)  Rate of leave accrual. Full-time employees begin to accrue annual leave immediately upon employment. Employees under temporary, provisional or emergency appointments and employees not deemed to be in the classified service will not accrue annual leave under these policies. Annual leave shall be accrued according to the following schedule: 

 
(4)  Notice of leave. A request for annual leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor. Annual leave may be taken only after approval by the appropriate department head so that, insofar as practicable, the department can function without the hiring of additional temporary help. Annual leave shall be authorized in units of days or hours only. 
(5)  Maximum allowable accumulation. Unused annual leave not exceeding 240 hours may be carried into the next calendar year. It is the intent of these rules to have employees take their annual leave yearly. Therefore, no payment shall be made for non-use of annual leave except as provided in subsection (d)(6) of this section unless approved by the mayor and city council. 
(6)  Payment for unused leave. 
a.  When an employee is separated from the service, such employee shall be paid for all unused annual leave (up to 160 hours) unless he fails to give proper notice of resignation as provided in section 28-10. 
b.  Employees may sell 40 hours of unused leave once each calendar year. No less than 40 hours may be sold. 
(e)  Sick leave. 
(1)  General. Sick leave shall be allowed to an eligible employee: 
a.  In the case of actual sickness or disability of the employee or for medical, dental or eye examination or treatment for which arrangements cannot be made outside of working hours; and 
b.  When the employee is required to care for a sick or injured spouse, child or member of immediate family domiciled in the employee's household. The employee shall report the illness prior to his scheduled work time if possible. If not, the employee shall see that the illness is reported within 30 minutes after the time he is scheduled to have reported for work. 
(2)  Eligibility. Those employees entitled to earn annual leave shall also be eligible to earn sick leave. Permanent part-time employees shall be entitled to sick leave in proportion to the number of hours worked. Temporary employees shall not be eligible for sick leave. Probationary employees shall be eligible to take sick leave. 
(3)  Rate of leave accrual. Eligible employees begin to accrue sick leave immediately upon employment at the rate of one day per month. 
(4)  Certification by physician. A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by a department head to substantiate a request for sick leave. Such certificate shall be required for all absences, due to illness or disability, of three or more days. Failure to provide certificate, when required, shall result in disapproval of the sick leave request. 
(5)  Maximum allowable accumulation. A maximum of 360 hours of sick leave may be accumulated. 
(6)  No payment of unused sick leave. When an employee is separated from the service, no payment shall be made for any unused sick leave. 
(7)  Donation of unused leave to other employees. This section is reserved for future use. 
(f)  Other types of leave. 
(1)  Military leave. 
a.  Any regular employee who leaves the classified service to join the military forces of the United States during a time of war or other national emergency, or is inducted by Selective Service, may, upon written request, prior to induction into the military, be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to extend through a date, 90 days after which such service terminates. Such employee shall be entitled to be restored to the vacated position, or a comparable position, provided the employee makes application to the city administrator within 90 days of the date of discharge under honorable conditions, and is physically and mentally capable of performing the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable accommodation. 
b.  The returning employee shall be entitled to any increases in salary (including cost-of-living increases) or any advancement in grade which would normally be accorded to the incumbent of the position, with the exception of any increases or advancement in grade which would normally be dependent on meritorious performance of the duties of the position. 
c.  In the event a position vacated by a person entering the military service, as stated above, no longer exists at the time he qualifies to return to work, such person shall be entitled to be re-employed in another position of the same status, class and pay in the classified service, provided such re-employment does not necessitate the laying off of another employee. 
d.  Any regular employee who is a member of the National Guard or an organized military reserve of the United States will be allowed leave of absence with pay not to exceed 18 calendar days, or in compliance with state law, during any calendar year to attend training camps upon presentation of orders concerning such training. Such leave shall not be charged to annual leave. 
(2)  Funeral leave. Funeral leave of three working days annually will be granted with pay for employees absent from duty due to the event of death in the family. Family, in this instance, means spouse, child, father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, or any relative who is domiciled in the employee's household. 
(3)  Workers' compensation. An employee who is temporarily disabled because of an injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his work may be covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 34, art. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the State Workers' Compensation Act. 
(4)  Temporary disabilities not covered by workers compensation. An employee who becomes temporarily disabled shall be allowed to exhaust his accrued sick and vacation leave. After all sick and vacation leave have been used, further extension of leave, either with or without pay, must be specifically authorized by the mayor and city council upon recommendation of the department head and approval of the city administrator. 
(5)  Civil leave. An employee shall be given necessary time off, without loss of pay, when performing jury duty, or when required by proper authority to be a witness in legal proceedings, provided such call to duty is reported in advance to the employee's department head. 
(6)  Maternity leave. 
a.  Maternity leave is a period of approved absence for incapacitation related to pregnancy and confinement. Maternity leave may be charged to sick leave or any combination of sick leave, annual leave and leave without pay. 
b.  The employee desiring maternity leave should report the pregnancy to the department head. Such notification shall include a written statement from the attending physician specifying the approximate date of birth. 
c.  An employee will be permitted to continue work, with reasonable accommodation, so long as the conditions of the pregnancy do not adversely impair work performance or health. 
d.  An employee may be granted leave without pay for maternity purposes in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(7)  Leave of absence without pay. A department head, with the approval of the city administrator, may grant a regular employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed six months. Leave of absence without pay for a period of exceeding six months and not more than one year may be granted with the approval of the mayor and city council. All departments are required to adhere to the following regulations: 
a.  Leave without pay shall be granted only when it will not adversely affect the interests of the city service. 
b.  Failure of an employee to return to work at the expiration of approved leave shall be considered as absence without leave and grounds for disciplinary action. 
c.  Any employee who has been granted leave of absence and who wishes to return before the leave period has expired shall be required to give his department head at least a one-week notice. Upon receipt of such written notice, the employee shall be permitted to return to work. 
d.  No sick leave or annual leave will be earned by an employee for the time that such employee is on leave without pay. 
e.  An employee may elect to have health insurance continue to be provided, with the employee paying the monthly premium in advance. 
f.  An employee shall return from leave without pay to the same salary grade as at the time of commencement of leave. 
g.  An employee who obtains either part time or full-time employment elsewhere while on an authorized leave of absence without pay is required to notify his department head in writing within three days of accepting such employment. 
h.  An employee returning from a leave of absence without pay shall be entitled to employment in the same department in the same or equivalent class wherein employed when said leave commenced. 
(8)  Family and medical leave. Family and medical leave shall be granted in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-3). 
(9)  Absence with leave. An absence of an employee from duty, including any absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be without pay and shall be cause for disciplinary action. 
(10)  Administrative leave. An employee may be placed on administrative leave with pay at the discretion of the department head and approval of the city administrator when such action is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(11)  Notification to city administrator. When an employee has taken leave of any kind or is absent without leave, his department head shall notify the city administrator in writing within the same pay period in which the leave is taken or the absence without leave occurs. Such notification may be by notation on a time card or attendance sheet or by memo, giving specific information covering type of leave, dates, hours, and other pertinent data. 
(Code 1985, § 3-916) 
Sec. 28-17. - Nepotism. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that no department head, the mayor or member of the city council, or city administrator shall appoint or employ any person to any regular classified position in the city who is a member of the immediate or extended family of such officer if such appointment or employment would cause a relative of such officer to come under the direct supervision of such officer. The employment of relatives is not prohibited by the city as long as none of the related persons are employed in a supervisory role when they might have an effect on a relative's progress, performance or welfare as an employee. An employee may not be promoted into a position in which they would have supervisory responsibility over a relative, unless the relative can be transferred to another position that would not be under the supervision of the relative that is being promoted. For this nepotism policy, relatives are defined as spouse, mother, father, stepmother, stepfather, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepson, stepdaughter, half-brother, half-sister, grandchild, grandparent and grandparents of spouse. This section does not apply to persons employed by the city prior to the adoption of these policies and procedures. 
(Code 1985, § 3-917) 
Sec. 28-18. - Equal opportunity and nondiscrimination. 
(a)  Policy. All applicants for positions and employees of the city shall be ensured of air and equitable treatment in all aspects of personnel administration, including training, promotion, and disciplinary action, without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, or religious creed and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. 
(b)  Publicity. The city administrator shall see that information about job opportunities and the equal employment policy of the city is readily available to all citizens of the city and especially to all potential job applicants. 
(c)  Appeals based on alleged discrimination. Any applicant or employee who believes that he has been discriminated against shall have the right to counsel with city administrator and to avail himself of the grievance procedure outlined in section 28-12. 
(d)  Affirmative action plan. The mayor and city council may adopt an affirmative action plan to formulate actions to correct employment practices which have, or potentially could have, a negative impact upon minority groups or females. 
(Code 1985, § 3-918) 
Sec. 28-19. - Political activities. 
No employee in the classified service shall engage in political activities at the workplace or during business hours. 
(Code 1985, § 3-919) 
Sec. 28-20. - Substance abuse policy. 
The city is committed to providing a safe work environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees. That commitment is jeopardized when any city employee illegally uses drugs on or off the job, comes to work under the influence, possesses, distributes or sells drugs in the workplace, or abuses alcohol on the job. Therefore, the city has established the following policy: 
(1)  Violations. 
a.  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to use, possess, sell, trade, offer for sale, or offer to buy illegal drugs or otherwise engage in the illegal use of drugs on or off the job. 
b.  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or while possessing in his body, blood, or urine illegal drugs in any detectable amount. 
c.  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or impaired by alcohol. 
d.  It is a violation of the city policy for any employee to use prescription drugs illegally, i.e., to use prescription drugs that have not been legally obtained or in a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed. However, nothing in this policy precludes the appropriate use of legally prescribed medications. 
e.  Violations of this policy are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(2)  Employee assistance. 
a.  The city offers resource information on various means of employee assistance in our community, including, but not limited to, drug and alcohol abuse programs. Employees are encouraged to use this resource file, which is located in the city hall personnel office. 
b.  Information will be distributed to employees for their confidential use, upon request. 
(3)  General procedures. 
a.  An employee reporting to work visibly impaired will be deemed unable to properly perform required duties and will not be allowed to work. If possible, the employee's supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion to confirm the employee's status. 
b.  The supervisor will consult privately with the employee to determine the cause of the observation, including whether substance abuse has occurred. 
c.  If, in the opinion of the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, one of the following actions will be taken: 
1.  The employee will be sent home. 
2.  The employee, if unable to care for himself, will be sent to a medical facility. 
Depending on the determination of the observed impairment, the employee may be accompanied by a supervisor, if necessary. An impaired employee will not be allowed to drive. 
(4)  Opportunity to contest or explain results. 
a.  Employees and job applicants who have a positive confirmed test may explain or contest the result to the city within five working days after the city contacts the employee or job applicant and shows him the positive test result as it was received from the laboratory in writing. 
b.  Any disciplinary action taken as a result of the test results will proceed once the test results are received and are not dependent upon the employee's right to explain or contest the results. 
(5)  Confidentiality. The confidentiality of any information received by the city through a substance abuse testing program shall be maintained, except as otherwise provided by law. All information received through substance abuse testing is confidential, but may be disclosed in a criminal, civil or administrative proceeding in accordance with state law. 
(6)  Pre-employment drug testing. 
a.  Applicants to the city for positions that are sensitive from a safety, health or security standpoint will undergo testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment. Any applicant with a confirmed positive test will be denied employment. 
b.  Applicants will be required to submit voluntarily to a urinalysis test at a laboratory chosen by the city, and by signing a consent agreement will release the city, its officers and agents from liability. An applicant who refuses to submit to substance abuse testing will not be eligible for hire. 
c.  If the physician, official, or lab personnel have reasonable suspicion to believe that the job-applicant has tampered with the specimen, the applicant will not be considered for employment. 
d.  The city will not discriminate against applicants for employment because of a past history of drug abuse. It is the current abuse of drugs, preventing employees from performing their job properly, that the city will not tolerate. Individuals who have failed a pre-employment test may initiate another inquiry with the city after a period of not shorter than six months; but they must present themselves drug-free as demonstrated by urinalysis or other test selected by the city. 
(7)  Employee testing. 
a.  The city has adopted testing practices to identify employees who use illegal drugs on or off the job or who abuse alcohol on the job. It shall be a condition of employment for all employees to submit to substance abuse testing under the following circumstances: 
1.  When there is reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is using illegal drugs or abusing alcohol. Reasonable suspicion is based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in violation of the employer's policy drawn from those facts in light of experience. Among other things, such facts and inferences may be based upon, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Observable phenomena while at work such as direct observation of substance abuse or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being impaired due to substance abuse. 
(ii)  Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance. 
(iii)  A report or suspicion of substance abuse provided by a reliable and credible source. 
(iv)  Information that any employee has caused or contributed to an accident while at work. 
(v)  Evidence that any employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the city's premises or while operating the city's vehicle, machinery, or equipment. 
2.  When employees have caused or contributed to an on-the-job inquiry that resulted in a loss of worktime, which means any period of time during which an employee stops performing the normal duties of employment and leaves the place of employment to seek care from a licensed medical provider. A supervisor may send employees for a substance abuse test if they are involved in on-the-job accidents where personal injury or damage to city or private property occurs. 
3.  As part of a follow-up program of treatment for drug abuse. 
4.  When a substance abuse test is conducted as part of a routinely-scheduled employee fitness-for-duty medical examination that is part of the city's established policy or that is scheduled routinely for all members of an employment classification group. 
5.  Upon request as part of a random drug screening program. 
b.  Employees with a confirmed positive test result may, at their option and expense, have a second confirmation test made on the same specimen. An employee will not be allowed to submit another specimen for testing. 
c.  If the physician, official, or lab personnel have reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has tampered with the specimen, the employee is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
d.  An employee who refuses to submit to substance abuse testing will be subject to disciplinary action. 
(8)  Alcohol abuse. 
a.  The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on the city's premises is prohibited. 
b.  An employee whose normal faculties are impaired due to the consumption of alcoholic beverages, or whose blood alcohol level tests positive, while on duty or on city business shall be guilty of misconduct, and shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination. 
c.  Failure to submit to a required substance abuse test is misconduct and shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination. 
(9)  Responsibility of city supervisors. It is the responsibility of the city's supervisors to counsel employees whenever they see changes in performance or behavior that suggest an employee has a drug problem. Although it is not the supervisor's job to diagnose personal problems, the supervisor should encourage such employees to seek help and advise them about available resources for getting help. Everyone shares responsibility for maintaining a safe work environment, and co-workers should encourage anyone who has a drug problem to seek help. 
(10)  Goals and intent of policy. The goal of this policy is to balance our respect for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive, and drug-free environment. The intent of this policy is to offer a helping hand to those who need it, while sending a clear message that the illegal use of drugs and the abuse of alcohol are incompatible with employment with the city. 
(Code 1985, § 3-921; Ord. of 1-3-2000) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42 et seq., 16-7-51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 30-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this article is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1985, § 7-201) 
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection person means a person who, under agreement, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that the term "collection person" shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where treatment, utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, highly flammable or explosive wastes, toxic wastes, sewage sludge, and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, chapter 270-5-20, entitled Radioactive Materials. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this article. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1985, § 7-202) 
Sec. 30-21. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In general. The director of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, said director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by the director of public works shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon holding a hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1985, § 7-203) 
Sec. 30-22. - Precollection. 
(a)  In general. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director of public works, by written notice, shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject the offender to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Containers. 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner of occupant or each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, water-tight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistance, rodent-proof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 35 gallons, except that bulk containers (dumpsters) of a type accepted by the director of public works as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly-owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions of which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting the waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and loaded in such a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(c)  Rubbish. 
(1)  Rubbish may be stored for collection in cardboard boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste. Loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cutting shall not exceed four inches in diameter or four feet in length. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. Leaves and straw shall be placed in bags provided by the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trim trees for compensation within the city unless the trimmings and limbs and trash resulting therefrom are immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the property owner or contractor in a disposal site. 
(3)  Trimming trees for compensation shall be interpreted to include those persons or contractors that remove trees completely or partially and receive compensation for the wood, limbs and other residue from such trimming and cutting. Any form of compensation shall place the burden of disposal of any residue from trimming and cutting directly upon the individual persons or contractors performing the task and the property owner. 
(4)  Building materials such as stone, dirt, plaster, lumber, brick, roofing, concrete, etc., or other materials from contract laborers, shall not be collected or removed by the city. The burden of responsibility for removal of said materials shall fall to the contractor and property owner. 
(d)  Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the director of public works, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(Code 1985, § 7-204) 
Sec. 30-23. - Collection. 
(a)  Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from residential premises weekly. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from commercial and business establishments in congested areas twice weekly. 
(b)  Limitations. Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported, or disposed of by public facilities; but such waste collection, transportation and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. It shall be a violation of this article to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box, or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the director of public works. 
(c)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters that are not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place showing: the owner's name; telephone number; state permit number; truck number; and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(d)  Private contractors. No person other than employees of the city shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business as provided in chapter 18. 
(Code 1985, § 7-205) 
Sec. 30-24. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. Waste deposited during operating hours at any site operated by the city shall be placed, as designated by the attendant on duty; waste deposited at any other times shall be placed in a bulk container located near the site entrance gate for the purpose of receiving such waste. Operating hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week except for holidays. Motor vehicle bodies or major parts thereof, large appliances, stumps, or logs over four feet in length shall not be deposited at publicly-operated disposal sites except by prior arrangement with the director of public works. Fees for such disposal shall be billed and collected as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1985, § 7-206) 
Sec. 30-25. - Garbage fee. 
(a)  All residences, businesses, churches, etc. which have curbside garbage pick-up available shall be assessed a monthly garbage fee as listed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Fee schedule. Inside city limits: $20.00. 
(1)  Garbage fees shall be included on the water/sewer bills. Where no monthly water/sewer bill is mailed to a garbage collection customer, a separate bill shall be sent for the garbage fee. 
(2)  Garbage fees shall be due and payable on the same date as the water/sewer bills. Any garbage fee not paid by the due date of the water/sewer bill shall be subject to a 12 percent late penalty. 
(3)  Past due garbage fees are collectable in the same manner as water/sewer bills. 
(4)  Any commercial customers such as businesses or multi-unit developments, which choose to use a dumpster service, may request a waiver of the garbage fee requirement. 
(5)  Garbage fees will be reviewed annually in October and any subsequent rate changes will take effect January 1 of the following year. 
(6)  The city administrator shall be authorized to make adjustments of garbage bills for the following reasons: 
a.  Computer or clerical error. 
b.  To resolve disputes concerning bills. But in no case, shall such adjustment cover more than two billing cycles. 
(Code 1985, § 7-208) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - General regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance and repair of public streets. All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the director of public works, who shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(b)  Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times and to remove from them all snow or ice within 12 hours from the time such snow or ice ceases to fall, or within less time if so ordered by the code enforcement officer or the director of public works. 
(c)  Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curb line of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curb line of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass property mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession and/or control of the same. 
(d)  Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. It shall be unlawful for any person to walk or drive any vehicle upon any newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
State Law reference— Damaging property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
(e)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(f)  Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(g)  Report or defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges. It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the city to report the same to the director of public works as soon as possible. 
(h)  Private use. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. This shall not be deemed to include citywide sidewalk sales or any other event which is approved by the public works director, city administrator, mayor or council. 
(i)  Encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way, without first having secured a permit from the city administrator in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(j)  Trees and shrubs. 
(1)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public street, parkway, or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city administrator in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(3)  Dangerous shrubs. Any shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or impediment to passage shall be removed. 
(4)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(k)  Burning of leaves and rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 8-201) 
Sec. 32-2. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Council resolution. Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resolution file with the city administrator a written protest against such improvement, and contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into an assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 39 (O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city administrator in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount designated by the public works director to fully protect the city from loss, with surety to be approved by the city council, required to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  In general. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established by the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curb ramps on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road, for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block placing them at the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(e)  Barricades. Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1985, § 8-202) 
Sec. 32-3. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of the city relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city administrator. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The purposed for which the application is submitted; 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work; and 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk or the director of public works. 
(b)  Permit fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $20.00. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(c)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city administrator shall forward such application to the director of public works who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the director of public works shall return the same to the city administrator. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the director of public works, the city administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city administrator. 
(e)  Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(g)  Expiration of permits. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire and the permit fee forfeited. 
(h)  Exceptions. Permits required under this section shall not apply to Georgia Power Company, Camden Telephone, or any other company having a franchise agreement with the city; however, said companies shall repair any damage to the city or private property to the satisfaction of the public works director. 
(Code 1985, § 8-205) 
Secs. 32-4—32-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 

Sec. 32-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-213(2)) 
Sec. 32-26. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Code 1985, § 9-213(6)) 
Sec. 32-27. - Permit. 
(a)  Registration and permit. Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade shall be required to register such parade with the city clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(b)  Application. Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the city clerk in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)  The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)  The number of vehicles, if any, and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(c)  Review of application. The city clerk shall forward the application to the mayor, who shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: 
(1)  The extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; 
(2)  The availability of law enforcement forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and 
(3)  Whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. 
(d)  Disposition. In the event the mayor determines, in view of all the circumstances, that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if he determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall grant the parade permit. In either case, the mayor shall indicate his disposition on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(Code 1985, § 9-213(1), (3)—(5)) 
Secs. 32-28—32-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GATHERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF PUBLIC EXPRESSION 

Sec. 32-58. - Gathering for purpose of public expression. 
(a)  The city and the city councilmembers, by and through the city administrator, shall be vested with the responsibility to receive applications for, and to accede to or deny, permits for the conduct in public spaces of demonstrative, informative, celebratory, or other forms of public expression involving ten or more people, hereinafter referred to as an event. 
(b)  The city, by and through the city administrator, shall determine to permit or refuse to permit any such conduct in or about public spaces solely on the basis of the factors or combination of factors set out hereinafter, and in light of a presumption that all peaceful expression not inconsistent with goals of this article hereinbefore enumerated, shall be permitted at all reasonable times and places. 
(1)  Use of public spaces and facilities. There shall be no demonstrative, informative, celebratory, or other forms of public expression, either fixed or processional, conducted on, over, upon, or burdening the public properties of the city, or employing the facilities thereon, without first being permitted by the city after application is made, according to the requirements set out hereinafter. 
(2)  Application. Within no less than 20 days prior to an event, the person associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wishes to conduct such event, shall apply to the city for a permit. Such application shall at a minimum include: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is an association or person in fact or in law, the application shall contain a description of the entity; the name of said entity, if names; the registered or recognized address of the entity, if any; the name of the person making the application on behalf of said entity; such person's relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
b.  A plan for review by the city, which plan will include: 
1.  The anticipated number of persons participating in the event; 
2.  The dates of the event; 
3.  The hours of each day the event will be conducted; 
4.  The exact location of said event, or, if the event is processional or mobile, the route of the event; 
5.  Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed; 
6.  Whether artificial lighting will be employed; 
7.  Whether temporary static structures will be constructed or employed, whether vehicles will be employed, and, if so, a description of same sufficient to permit the city to evaluate the permitting factors set out hereinafter; 
8.  A description of provisions necessary to the safety and welfare of the participants in the event and members of the public in the area where the event will be conducted and routes of access thereto and therefrom; 
9.  Whether the event will require that the public spaces or facilities to be used or burdened, or the routes and means of access thereto and therefrom, be temporarily diverted from their dedicated or customary uses, or the public or private users thereof be diverted or excluded from or limited in their use or enjoyment of, or their access to or through, said spaces or facilities, before, during, or after the event. 
c.  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has, in the past, conducted or participated in an event of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and, if so, where and when such prior event took place, and whether as a result of such event the applicant or entity became the subject, whether or not the operating under the same name, as plaintiff or defendant, or any legal action, civil, criminal, or administrative. 
d.  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has defaulted upon or is in arrears as to any judgment, civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant, or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant, or entity, whether or not then operating under the same name, as a result of participation in any prior event or a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and, if so, a description of said judgment or order and an explanation for noncompliance. 
e.  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement in factor of the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees, in a form satisfactory to the attorney for the city. 
1.  If, as a direct consequence of exigent, unanticipated, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, the applicant is unable to file an application not less than 20 days before an event, nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the filing of an application at a later time, but in such case the time limits for review by the county, and for review and appeal in the case of a denial of a permit, shall remain the same. 
2.  Where an event conducted on, over, upon, or burdening properties, or employing the facilities thereon, which is also to substantially involve or take place partly or wholly upon private property with the consent of the owner thereof, such owner or their authorized representatives must join as an applicant for any permit for such event. 
(c)  Review by the city. 
(1)  Within seven working days of receipt of an application, the city administrator of the city shall review the application in light of all of the contents thereof and the goals, intentions, and presumption of this article as set out hereinbefore, and render a decision and communicate same to the applicant, either permitting the event as planned or denying a permit for same. If the permit is denied, the city administrator shall provide the applicant, in writing, a statement of the reasons therefor. First class mail to the address provided by the applicant, postmarked no more than seven working days after receipt of the application, shall be sufficient for this purpose, though not the exclusive means of notice. 
(2)  Nothing in this process shall prevent the city administrator of the city, at his sole option and within the seven-day period for approval or denial, to confer with the applicant with respect to modifications of applicant's plan for the event, and amend the application to reflect such modifications if agreed to by applicant; however, the applicant may neither supplement nor amend its application within said seven-day period except at the invitation of the city. Any attempt to do so sua sponte shall be deemed a separate and new application. 
(3)  The city administrator may deny the application for permit upon any of the following reasons or combination of reasons: 
a.  The application does not contain all required information, or that information set out is too incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent full and proper review by the city; 
b.  The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations; 
c.  The applicant or entity represented by applicant is incompetent to contract, sue, or be sued; 
d.  The person applying lacks authority to represent an entity for which the application is made; 
e.  The applicant or entity represented by the applicant has, on prior occasions, damaged public property, or has not paid in full for such damages, or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether under the same name or another; 
f.  The applicant or entity represented by the applicant has on prior occasions violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature; 
g.  The plan of the event, as proposed, would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of participants in the event or other members of the public, though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public; 
h.  The plan of the event, as proposed, would unduly restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public roads, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such event; 
i.  The plan of the event, as proposed, would constitute an unreasonable disturbance of the peace, or would unreasonably burden lawful commerce in the area at the time of the proposed event, or would unreasonably intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the proposed event, though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public; 
j.  The plan of the event, as proposed, includes activities which are prohibited by laws of the United States, the state, or ordinances of the city, county, or other lawful body or activities which constitute nuisance or tortuous conduct with respect to public or private property or persons. 
It is the specific intent of the city in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place and manner or events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. The factors enumerated above, which the city finds express and support the substantial and compelling interests of this governing body in the preservation of the right and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health, and good order of its society, are the only basis upon which the city administrator of the city shall decide to issue or deny a permit applied for hereunder, and no such decision shall be made or justified based upon the anticipated or predicted content of the speech or expressive conduct of any applicant. 
(d)  Revocation. Notwithstanding the grant of any permit as provided herein, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate an event at any time, or prevent its initiation, should traffic, weather, or other conditions develop which present an imminent and undue danger to those participating in the event pursuant to said permit, to the public at large, or should any consideration or combination or considerations enumerated herein as a ground for denial of a permit arise or first become apparent to law enforcement authorities after the grant of a permit. If, in preparation for or after the start of an event for which a permit has been issued, participants in said event violate the terms of the permit or deviate in material fashion from the plan submitted in application for the permit, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate the event. 
(e)  Administrative review by the city. Upon receipt of any decision by the city administrator of the city denying an application, the applicant may, within five calendar days, file an appeal of said denial with the city council, which appeal shall be in writing and be sent to city council by certified mail or hand delivery. Upon the receipt of any such appeal, the city administrator shall notify the attorney for the city, who shall promptly, but in case no later than seven calendar days after receipt of the appeal, seek review of the denial of the application in a called meeting of the city council. The city administrator shall have the burden of demonstrating the validity of the denial of the permit as applied for by the applicant. If no appeal is filed by the applicant, there shall be no duty on the part of the city to seek judicial review of the decision at a called meeting of the city council. The city administrator shall have the burden of demonstrating the validity of the denial of the permit as applied for by the applicant. If no appeal is filed by the applicant, there shall be no duty on the part of the city to seek judicial review of the decision of the city administrator. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the applicant from seeking judicial review of a denial of a permit in a court of competent jurisdiction at any time after notification of the decision on the application. 
(Code 1985, § 13-132) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 8-101) 
Sec. 34-2. - No parking zones. 
(a)  Upon the basis of the report and recommendation of the state highway traffic and safety engineer, the city council finds that the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles within the areas of the state highway system described in said report is dangerous to those using the highway and unduly interferes with the free movement of traffic thereon. 
(b)  Under said authority, the stopping, standing or parking of said vehicles is prohibited within the limits of the following areas: 
State Route 25 Spur—That segment of roadway on State Route 25 Spur mile post 0.00 to mile post 0.02 both sides of the roadway, a distance of 100 feet to be zones "No Parking Anytime." 
(c)  Signs designating no parking zones will be erected by the department of transportation. 
(Code 1985, § 8-103) 
Sec. 34-3. - Restricted road use. 
(a)  The following road weight limitations are hereby enacted: 

 
(b)  Signs designating the restricted use of these roads shall be erected. 
(c)  Penalty. Violations of this section shall be misdemeanors and, upon conviction of same, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Code 1985, § 8-104) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Water conservation plan. 
As a condition of the city's request to withdraw water from the Floridan Aquifer for use in its water system, the city is required to develop a water conservation plan which is to be submitted to the state environmental protection division for approval. The plan shall initially be submitted to the city council for approval at the March 1996 meeting and thereafter, the plan shall be updated and submitted for approval to the city council annually at the March meeting. A copy of the water conservation plan shall be kept on file at city hall. 
Secs. 36-2—36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 36-21. - Water service rates and charges. 
(a)  Application for water service. The consumer shall make application for water service in person, at the city hall, and at the same time and place shall make a cash security deposit as follows: 
(1)  Residential service: $60.00. 
(2)  Commercial service: deposit shall equal two months average bill based on the last 12 months of service at the service location. Where there is no prior service at the service location, deposit shall be calculated on two months of base charges plus the average monthly usage for two months as estimated in section 36-48(a)(2)b. 
(3)  Industrial service: by contract. 
(b)  Water connection charges. A water connection charge to compensate the city for the expense of making water connections shall be paid by each user. The water connection charge shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential: $1,100.00 for three-quarters-inch meter. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial: 

 
In all cases of new multiple-type users, the city will require individual meters for each unit. Where depth of connection, pavement, sidewalks, or other physical conditions cause excess installation costs by the city, these costs will be assigned to the user as connection charges. There shall be no labor charge for the first three hours of work. All work over three hours shall be billed to the customer. The customer shall be billed for in excess of 50 feet and any other materials not normally used in connection to water pipe at costs. 
(c)  Base charges and user rates. Base charges and user rates are as follows: 
(1)  Residential usage. 
a.  Base charge, per month: $6.00. 
b.  User rates, per month: 

 
(2)  Commercial/industrial. 
a.  Base charge, per month: $6.00. 
b.  User rates, per month: 

 
The minimum base charge for the availability of the water system shall be the same as the base charge for water as set out herein provided. A public water main is within 100 feet of the property line of said residence, business or industry. The base charge shall not apply to unoccupied residences, businesses or industries, provided no water service is turned on. 
(d)  Complaints or disputes. If the consumer believes his bill is in error, he shall present his claim, in writing at the city hall, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. If the seal of a meter is broken by other than a city representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is topped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(e)  Adjustments. The city administrator shall be authorized to make adjustments of water bills for the following reasons: 
(1)  Computer or clerical error; 
(2)  Erroneous meter reading; 
(3)  Malfunctioning water meter; 
(4)  To resolve disputes concerning bills, but in no case shall such adjustment cover more than two billing cycles; 
(5)  In cases of excessively high water usage, but in no case shall such adjustment cover more than two billing cycles. 
(f)  Meter requirements. A meter is required to be installed in the water connection to each building, or to each unit of a multifamily or business building, whether public or private, except for approved fire protection lines. If a second meter, not otherwise required by this article, is installed for the purpose of metering water for irrigation or other non-sewer uses, there shall be no base charge applied to the second meter. This provision shall not apply to any building having one connection to water or sewer service in a multi-unit building, existing on May 1, 1981, provided that any new structures must provide separate meters for each unit unless the public works director determines that additional meters would not be feasible. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, and other establishments providing temporary lodging facilities shall not be required to have more than one meter. 
(g)  Fire hydrant rental. The charge to the city for the privilege of taking water from the waterworks system through its fire hydrants shall be determined by the city council yearly at the meeting in which the annual budget is approved. 
(h)  Water service for fire protection purposes. Rates for standby water service for sprinkling or other fire protection systems in buildings shall be shown on appendix A. The expense of all such connections to an extension from the water mains shall be borne by the user. No taps will be allowed which may be used for other than fire protection purposes, and there shall be no connection with any other source of water except in case a tank or fire pump is installed as a secondary supply for such fire protection purposes. 
(i)  Bills. Bills for water shall be rendered monthly, and no discount shall be allowed for prompt payment thereof. If any bill shall not be paid before the 20th day following the original date of billing, a charge equal to 12 percent of the amount of such bill shall be added thereto. If any bill shall not be paid within 30 days from the original date of billing, service shall be discontinued. In the event that service is discontinued for nonpayment of bills, the premises shall be disconnected from the waterworks system of the city. Water bills constitute indebtedness to the city and are collectable in the same manner as property taxes or through the small claims court of the county. 
(j)  Reconnection fees. There shall be a reconnection charge of $15.00 for reconnecting a service which was discontinued for nonpayment of water bills. The reconnection charge is in addition to additional deposit fees, and payment in full of the past due amounts outstanding. If reconnection of services is performed after regular working hours, on holidays or weekends, the reconnection fee shall be $50.00. 
(k)  Special contract rates. Nothing in the above schedule referring to retaining water rates shall restrict the city council's authority, with the approval of the city's consulting engineers, to modify its excess water rates, by special contractual agreement to serve industrial or other large users, regularly having a water demand in excess of 200,000 gallons monthly. 
(l)  Returned check fees. 
(1)  Checks returned by banking institutions for any reason shall be subject to a $25.00 returned check fee. 
(2)  When a check is returned, the customer shall be notified by a door tag on the same day the check is returned which states that services will be discontinued at 5:00 p.m., two business days from the date the check was returned unless payment is made prior to that time. The tag shall give the total amount due (amount of check plus the returned check fee). 
(3)  Any customer having two returned checks shall no longer be allowed to pay for services with a personal check. All future payments shall be made by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(4)  The city administrator may, at his discretion, waive or remove the returned check fee or penalty. 
(m)  Administration fee. A fee of $15.00 shall be charged each time that disconnection of water services for nonpayment of past due amounts is temporarily waived. 
(Code 1985, § 7-109) 
Sec. 36-22. - Miscellaneous water provisions. 
(a)  Use of revenues. The intent of this article is to provide adequate water revenues, supplemented by sewer revenues, to pay for the operation and maintenance of the waterworks and sewer systems of the city, to support the payment of the principal and interest on any loan to the city from time to time for the purpose of making extensions and improvements to such utilities; to establish and maintain a fund sufficient to make extensions and repairs thereto; and providing that all funds collected hereunder shall be segregated, maintained, and disposed of as provided herein; provided further that the funds to be derived from such utility may be pledged by the city council by a proper ordinance or resolution for the purpose of securing funds by the sale of water and sewer bonds or certificates for the purpose of repairing and/or extending such utilities including plant or any system segment thereof. 
(b)  Connection to potable water supply. The owner of each house, building, or other property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes requiring plumbing and connection thereto of a potable water supply and situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public water main of the city, is hereby required at his expense to connect such plumbing with the proper public water main in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official written notice to do so, provided that a public water main is located within 500 feet of the property line of said residence, business or industry. 
(c)  Supply by city. The city undertakes to use a reasonable care and diligence to provide a constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure to customers, but reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, or for other purposes, and the city shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water, or the pressure thereof for any cause whatsoever, or for any damage caused thereby or for the bursting and breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment to the city's property. All customers having installations upon their premises, depending upon pressure in the city's pipes to keep them supplied, are cautioned against danger of collapse and all damage shall be borne exclusively by the customer. 
(d)  Cross-connections. In the interest of public health, the city will not permit its main or services to be connected with any service pipe or piping which is connected with any service pipe or piping which is connected with any other source of water supply. The city will also not permit its mains or service pipes to be connected in any way to any piping, tank, vat or other matter which might flow back into the city's service pipe or mains and consequently endanger the water supply. 
(e)  Restrictions upon use. The city reserves the right, in periods of drought or emergency or when deemed essential to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, to restrict, curtail or prohibit the use of water for secondary purposes, such as sprinkling, car washing, or filling swimming pools, and shall have the right to fix the hours and period when water may be used for such purposes. Should the customer require water with different pressures or of different quality or in any way different from that normally supplied by the city, he shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make these adjustments. In case of different pressures desired, the devices must be approved by the city. 
(f)  Consumer's responsibility and liability. Water furnished by the city shall be used for the consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where a meter or meter-box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private outside off-valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must first offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(g)  Access to premises and extensions of the system. Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing the city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. Extensions to the sewer system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city, a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement and, in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply any water under this agreement. 
(h)  Change of occupancy. Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall, to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure, or the time specified for departure, whichever is longer. The new occupant shall apply the water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(i)  Discontinuance of service. The city reserves the right to discontinue service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules and regulations. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1985, § 7-110) 
Secs. 36-23—36-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-48. - Sewer rates and special charges. 
There is hereby established a uniform schedule of rates, other charges for the use, or reasonable availability for use, of the services and facilities of the municipal sanitary sewer system, by each residence, each unit of a multifamily residence, business establishment, public building, or other type of private building producing domestic sewage and/or wastewater. This provision shall not apply to any building having one connection to water or sewer service in a multi-unit building existing on May 1, 1981, provided that all new structures or subdivisions of existing structures shall have each unit billed individually unless the public works director determines that additional metering would not be feasible. Hotels, motels, boarding houses and other establishments providing temporary lodging facilities shall pay the sewer rate as one business. 
(1)  Sewer rates. The base charge and sewer rates shall be as follows: 

 

 
(2)  Sewer charges. The base charge for the availability of the sewer system shall be the same as the base charge for sewer as herein set out, provided a public sewer main is within 100 feet of the property line of said residence, business, or industry. The base charge shall not apply to unoccupied residences, businesses or industries provided that no water service, city or otherwise, is turned on. 
(3)  Complaints or disputes. If the consumer believes his bill is in error, he shall present his claim, in writing at the city hall, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(4)  Adjustments. The city administrator shall be authorized to make adjustments of water bills for the following reasons: 
a.  Computer or clerical error; 
b.  Erroneous meter readings; 
c.  Malfunctioning water meter; 
d.  Leaks in water line where water did not enter the sewer system. But in no case, shall such adjustment cover more than two billing cycles; 
e.  To resolve disputes concerning bills. But in no case, shall such adjustment cover more than two billing cycles. 
(5)  Sewer charges. Sewage system users who are not water system users shall be charged for sewer service in one of the following ways: 
a.  At the request of the user, the city may elect to permit the user to pay sewage service charges based on water meter readings of non-city-supplied water. The meters shall be installed under the supervision of the public works director on all water supplies and the meter readings shall be used to compute the monthly sewer service charges in accordance with this article. The meters shall be of the type and style specified by the city and shall be supplied and installed at the expense of the user. 
b.  Where the metering of water usage is impractical or unwanted, the city may elect to assess sewer service charges for various installations based on sewage flows estimated by the state environmental protection division as follows: 

 
(6)  Security deposit. The consumer shall make application for sewer service in person, at the city hall, and at the same time and place, shall make a cash security deposit as follows: 
a.  Residential service: $60.00. 
b.  Commercial service: deposit shall equal two months average bill based on the last 12 months of service at the service location. Where there is no prior service at the service location, deposit shall be calculated on two months of base charges plus the average monthly usage for two months estimated of this section. 
c.  Industrial service: by contract. 
(7)  Sewer connection charge. A sewer connection charge to compensate the city for the expense of making sewer connections shall be paid by each user. The sewer connection charge shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential: $700.00. 
b.  Commercial/industrial: fee shall be $4,000.00 minimum, except that for an RV park the charge shall be $1,750.00 per space. 
Where depth of connection, pavement, sidewalks, or other physical conditions cause excess installation cost by the city, these costs will be assigned to the user as connection charges. There shall be no labor charge for the first three hours of work. All work over three hours shall be billed to the customer. The customer shall be billed for in excess of 50 feet and any other materials not normally used in connection to sewer pipe at cost. 
(8)  No free sewer service. There shall be no free service rendered by the municipal sewer system. Whether actually connected to the sewer system or not, sewer service shall be considered as rendered to the customer and the monthly sewer service charge shall be imposed, provided the city has made available a sewer line located at a satisfactory below-ground elevation in a street, alley, or easement adjacent to the lot or parcel of the property and within reasonable proximity of the structure to be served, it having been deemed essential to the health and well-being of the citizens that the city expend funds to make such service available. Such sewer service charges shall be imposed as set forth in this article. 
(9)  Bills. Bills for sewer shall be rendered monthly to the owner or occupant of the premises served by the sewer system and no discount shall be allowed for prompt payment thereof. If any bill shall not be paid before the 20th day following the original date of billing, a charge equal to 12 percent of the amount of such bill shall be added thereto. If any bill shall not be paid within 30 days from the original date of billings, service shall be discontinued with no notice required. In the event the occupant is someone other than the owner, as in rental property, the owner shall be liable for the unpaid bill, provided that the city has given written notice of the delinquency by first class mail to the owner at their last-known address or the address on record in the county tax assessor's office within 90 days of the date the bill is delinquent. In the event the city fails to notify the owner as provided above, the owner shall not be liable for the sewer bill until the city provides written notice, at which time the owner becomes liable for the current bill and any future bills, but is not liable for any bills due before notice was given. The owner shall not be liable for sewer usage bill in excess of the amount accumulated 30 days from the original billing date, provided the premises is connected to the city water system, but shall be liable for the base charge during the entire period of occupancy. If the premises are connected to any other than the city water system, the owner shall be liable for the entire charge during the period of occupancy. All sewer bills constitute indebtedness to the city and are collectable in the same manner as property taxes or through the small claims court of the county. In the event that service is discontinued for nonpayment of bills, the premises shall be disconnected from the sewer system of the city. 
(10)  Reconnection charges. If the sewer is physically disconnected for nonpayment of sewer service charges, there shall be imposed a reconnection charge equivalent to a tap fee in addition to any reconnection charges for water service and other penalties incurred due to such interruption of service. 
(11)  Other fees. The charges hereinbefore set forth shall in no way void requirements to pay other plumbing inspection and permit fees as may be adopted from time to time. 
(12)  Records; city administrator. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to keep a record of all parties who are connected to the sanitary sewage system and to make changes in conformance with the rates herein established. The city administrator shall bid for such service in the same manner and according to the methods used for billing for water service furnished by the city. 
(13)  Accessible sewer main. No water service shall be furnished by the city to any new building, residence or other structure having a sewer main located within 100 feet of the property line unless such business, residence or other structure is to be connected with the city sewer; and no septic tank or other individual sewage disposal method shall be utilized for any such new building, residence or other structure having a sewer main within 100 feet of the property line. 
(14)  Returned check fees. 
a.  Checks returned by banking institutions for any reason shall be subject to a $25.00 returned check fee. 
b.  When a check is returned, the customer shall be notified by a door tag on the same day the check is returned which states that services will be discontinued at 5:00 p.m., two business days from the date the check was returned unless payment is made prior to that time. The tag shall give the total amount due (amount of check plus the returned check fee). 
c.  Any customer having two returned checks shall no longer be allowed to pay for services with a personal check. All future payments shall be made by cash, money order or cashier's check. 
d.  The city administrator may, at his discretion, waive or remove the returned check fee or penalty. 
(Code 1985, § 7-111) 
Sec. 36-49. - Industrial user charge system. 
Industrial user charge system shall be based on a system of charges which will ensure that each recipient of waste treatment service will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement. Each industrial user charge shall be based on measured proportional contribution to the total treatment works loading considering the factors of strength, volume, and delivery flow rate characteristics of the wastewater. 
(Code 1985, § 7-112) 
Secs. 36-50—36-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 36-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days of 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drains to the public sewer of other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage solid means waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly-shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer controlled by public authority. 
Public water main means a water main controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and in which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Service, water service, sewer service or served by the water/sewer system means any residence, commercial establishment, industry or other structure or dwelling which consumes water or discharges sewage into the city system. Said structure or dwelling will be assessed the basic charge provided the property line in within 100 feet of water main with respect to water service and 200 feet of a sewer line with respect to sewer service. Said basic charge shall be assessed regardless of actual connection to the city system. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given component or in quantity of flow excess for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operations. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solid means solids that either float on the surface of, or are suspended in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a defined channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1985, § 7-101) 
Sec. 36-73. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Polluted water. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)  Unlawful sewage disposal. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Owner's duties. The owner of all houses, buildings, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of official written notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1985, § 7-102) 
Sec. 36-74. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  No public sewer available. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 36-73, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permit prior to construction. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the public works director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the public works director. The disposal system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications and operated and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the seepage or discharge of sewage or other liquid waste from such systems to the surface of the ground; to a watercourse, drainage ditch, canal, storm sewer storm drain, lake, stream, river, estuary, or other bodies of water. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Permit; effective date. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed according to the standards hereinafter set forth. The public works director shall utilize the then current environmental protection and acceptable building standards, normal to the trade, in arriving at his determination of satisfaction. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the public works director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the public works director. 
(d)  Private sewage disposal system. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Subsequent available public sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 36-73, and should a direct connection be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt and abandoned as a sewage treatment or disposal system. 
(f)  Sanitary operation of private systems. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner, as determined by the state, city and county health officers at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  State and county officers. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state and county health officers. 
(Code 1985, § 7-103) 
Sec. 36-75. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(b)  Classes of building permits. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the public works director. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and negotiated fee based upon use for an industrial user producing industrial wastes shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The city council may waive the $50.00 per unit fee for residential or commercial developer with the development of five or more units provided that the developer is installing all lines, taps, and connections at his expense. The inspection fee would then be the hourly rate of the public works director as established in the schedule of fees multiplied by the actual hours used during the inspection. In addition to the permit and inspection fee, the owner shall also pay to the city a $30.00 security deposit, which is refundable upon discontinuance of service. No refundable deposits shall be returned to anyone, unless all indebtedness owing to the city under this division shall be paid in full. 
(c)  Building costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  One sewer per building. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Existing sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public works director to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  Sewer construction and materials. The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; ASTM 1251 Class 50 Ductile Iron, ASTM or PVC Specifications SDR 35 conforming to ASTM 3034. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe. Cast iron pipe may be required by the public works director where the building sewer is exposed to possible damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the public works director. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(g)  Size and slope of sewer. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the public works director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe when installed in a horizontal position shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot nor more than one quarter inch per foot. 
(h)  Elevation of sewer. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged into the building sewer. 
(i)  Bearing walls and alignment. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(j)  Open trench work. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the public works director. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(k)  Surface runoff and groundwater. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(l)  Connection rules and regulations. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or in amplifications of the ASTM and the WPCP Manual of Practice Number Nine. All such connections shall be made gastight and materials must be approved by the public works director before installation. 
(m)  Connection at "Y" branch. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry in the downstream direction can be of any angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the public works director. 
(n)  Notice for inspection and connection. The applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the public works director when the building owner is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works director or his representative. 
(o)  Excavation; barricades and notice. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Prior to excavation, blockage, disruption, or any disturbance of any public street, road, highway, byway, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, notification must be made to and approval obtained from the public works director at least 72 hours in advance of such excavation, blockage, disruption or disturbance. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(p)  Industrial waste. Any industry or establishment introducing industrial waste to the system shall agree to comply with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's pretreatment regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 7-104) 
Sec. 36-76. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  Stormwater, runoff, cooling water, etc. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Unpolluted discharges. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the public works director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of 0.2 mg/L as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the public works director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the public works director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
a.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
b.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
c.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director. 
d.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
e.  Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substance that exceed limits established by the public works director, state environmental protection division or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
f.  Any wastes containing noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair, including, but not limited to, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide in excess of 1.0 mg/L. 
g.  Any radioactive wastes or isotypes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public works director in compliance with state or federal regulations. 
h.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
i.  Materials which exert or cause: 
1.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
2.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye, wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
3.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements, in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
4.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
j.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
k.  Water or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 300 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis, or for any sample period having a five-day BOD in excess of two times the average influent value for the affected sewage treatment plant during the previous calendar year. 
l.  Water or wastes having a suspended solids content in excess of 350 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis or having a suspended solids content for any sample period greater than two times the average influent value for the affected sewage treatment plant during the previous calendar year. 
(d)  Evaluation of substances. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess, the characteristics enumerated in section 36-75, and which, in the judgment of the public works director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the public works director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provision of this division. 
If the public works director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(e)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be returned for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director, and shall be located so as to be readily handle liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(f)  Preliminary treatment and flow equalizing systems. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(g)  Manhole for industries. When required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(h)  Examination of water. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control manholes provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards, to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples). 
(i)  Industrial agreement with city. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1985, § 7-105) 
Sec. 36-77. - Protection from damage. 
See O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 7-106) 
Sec. 36-78. - Powers and authorities of inspectors. 
(a)  The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provision of this division. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 7-107) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, being an ordinance adopted on March 4, 1985. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE OF ORDINANCE 

Sec. 1.1. - [Designated.] 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Woodbine, Georgia." 
ARTICLE II. - ENACTMENT, PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF ORDINANCE 

Sec. 2.1. - Enactment and purpose. 
In accordance with the Authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly and ratified by General Election, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of Woodbine, Georgia; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the City, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the City Government of Woodbine, Georgia, does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
Sec. 2.2. - Scope. 
An ordinance of the City of Woodbine, Georgia, regulating the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, and other purposes, and the size of yards; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the imposition of penalties for the violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Interpretation of terms. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(7)  The words "map" or "zoning map" means the official zoning map of the City of Woodbine. 
Sec. 3.2. - Definitions. 
(1)  "Accessory Use or Building:" A use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
(2)  "Buffer Strip:" Any institutional, commercial or industrial use, off-street loading areas, or off-street parking areas for five or more automobiles shall be separated from adjoining residential property by a continuous planted buffer strip or a solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristic of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
(3)  "Building:" Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
(4)  "Center Line of Streets:" A line surveyed and monumented as such, or, if a center line has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
(5)  "Condominium:" A building containing three (3) or more individually-owned dwelling units and related, jointly-owned common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(6)  "Dwelling:" A building, other than a mobile home or house trailer, designed, arranged or used for living and/or sleeping quarters, including single-family, two-family and apartment dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or boarding houses and meeting requirements of the Southern Standard Building Code [International Building Code]. 
(a)  "Dwelling, Single-Family:" A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family. 
(b)  "Dwelling, Duplex:" A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
(c)  "Dwelling, Apartment:" A building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families in individual dwelling units. 
(7)  "Dwelling Unit:" One or more rooms with kitchen facilities designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes. 
(8)  "Home Occupation:" See Article Seven, Section 7.8, Home Occupation. 
(9)  "Lot:" A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings, including accessory buildings or uses incidental to them, and including such open spaces as are required by this ordinance. 
(10)  "Mobile Home:" A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics: 
(a)  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a bath, and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections which are adaptable to outside electrical disconnection or for direct connection to the mobile home electrical panel. 
(b)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on a separate chassis. 
(c)  Arriving at the site complete and ready for occupancy and requiring only minor work before occupancy. 
(d)  The term "mobile home" includes the term "house trailers" but does not include travel trailers or other recreational vehicles not used for year-round occupancy. 
(e)  Constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards and bearing an insignia by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(11)  "Mobile Home Park:" A parcel of land which is used or intended to be used for the rental or lease of spaces, lots or mobile home and the provision of services for two (2) or more mobile homes. 
(12)  "Modular Home:" A factory-fabricated, single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of "industrialized building." An industrialized building is defined as a closed construction building assembly, or system of subassemblies, or components thereof which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, or other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities for installation or erection with or without other specified components, as a finished building or as a part of a finished building, and shall include, but not be limited to, residential, commercial, institutional, storage and industrial structures. The unit must have attached an insignia of approval from the State Building Administrative Board (SBAB). 
(13)  "Special Use:" A special use is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without certain restrictions or conditions throughout a zoning district but, if controlled as to number, area, location and relation to neighborhood, would promote the general welfare of the City. Such uses may be permitted as specific provision for such special uses are made in this ordinance. 
(14)  "Townhouse:" A building containing two (2) or more attached dwelling units or groups of dwelling units, each dwelling unit being intended for individual ownership and without jointly-owned common areas. 
(15)  "Yard:" An open space on the same lot with a principal building unoccupied except as permitted by this ordinance. 
(a)  "Front Yard:" An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(b)  "Rear Yard:" An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building or use, extending in the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(c)  "Side Yard:" An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(16)  "Variance:" A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure, for size of yards and open spaces, and for any rule or regulation herein involving distance, area, height, or any other dimensions. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by a variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 4.1. - Establishment of districts. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the City of Woodbine, Georgia, is divided into eight (8) districts designated as follows: 
"R-1" Low-Density Residential District. 
"R-2" Single-Family Residential—Mobile Home District. 
"R-3" Medium-High Density Residential District. 
"B-1" Central Business District. 
"B-2" Roadside Business District. 
"I-1" Light Industrial District. 
"I-2" General Industrial District. 
"M-H" Mobile Home Park District. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map. Said map is entitled "Zoning Map of Woodbine, Georgia" and dated August 1, 1972, and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4.2. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are property or lot lines, land lot lines, the center lines of streets or such lines extended, the corporate limit lines, a line midway between the main tracks of a railroad, or the center line of streams or drainage ways. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT USE PROVISIONS 
The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly, and to each class or kind of structure or land, except when modifications are provided. 

Sec. 5.1. - R-1, Low-density residential district. 
The R-1 low-Density Residential District is composed chiefly of low-density residential areas of the City plus certain open areas where similar residential development is designated by the Land Use Plan. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage similar and complimentary type residential development together with the recreation, religious and educational facilities desirable in a neighborhood. 
A.  Uses Permitted. In the R-1 Low-Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, except mobile homes. 
(2)  Churches, fraternal organizations and clubs not operating for profit. 
(3)  Customary accessory buildings related to uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Public buildings, structures and grounds. 
(6)  Schools, including private schools. 
(7)  Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at least one hundred [and] fifty square feet of outdoor play area is provided or each child and that such play area is enclosed by a fence of no less than three feet, six inches (3'6") in height. 
(8)  Railroad lines. 
(9)  Public utility substations. 
(10)  Agricultural purposes, including field crop farming, forestry and truck gardening, but not including the care and handling of animals. 
Sec. 5.2. - R-2, Single-family residential—mobile home district. 
The R-2 Single-Family Residential—Mobile Home District is to provide distinct areas in the city for both conventional single-family homes and mobile homes. Such areas currently exist within the city and it is hereby a policy of the city to provide for the continuance of these areas and to protect them from encroachment of incompatible uses. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in R-2, Single-Family Residential—Mobile Home Districts shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family mobile homes on individual lots subject to the placement provisions of Section 7.9. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Country clubs, golf courses. 
(5)  General purpose farm or garden, but not the keeping of poultry or non-domestic animals. 
(6)  Accessory uses and structures. 
Sec. 5.3. - R-3, Medium-high density residential district. 
The R-3 Medium-High Density Residential District provides areas for duplexes, apartments, townhouses and condominium dwellings of medium to high density. This district's regulations are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable and healthy residential environment while discouraging the encroachment of uses capable of adversely affecting the district's character. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in R-3 Medium-High Density Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Motel or hotel. 
(2)  Retail or wholesale trade establishment. 
(3)  Repair and maintenance services but not including the storage of junk vehicles or otherwise inoperable vehicles. 
(4)  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional or other general purposes. 
(5)  Personal or business service establishment. 
(6)  Eating establishment. 
(7)  Financial institution. 
(8)  Parks. 
Sec. 5.4. - B-1, Central business district. 
The B-1 Central Business District is intended to promote and protect the commercial core of the city; to provide areas where businesses are oriented to the pedestrian, not the automobile; to provide for the intense use of property by not requiring building setbacks and to provide an area for businesses which benefit from proximity to one another. 
A.  Uses Permitted. 
(1)  Motel or hotel. 
(2)  Retail or wholesale trade establishment. 
(3)  Repair and maintenance services but not including the storage of junk vehicles or otherwise inoperable vehicles. 
(4)  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional or other general purposes. 
(5)  Personal or business service establishment. 
(6)  Eating establishment. 
(7)  Financial institution. 
(8)  Parks. 
Sec. 5.5. - B-2, Roadside business district. 
The B-2 Roadside Business District is intended primarily for the development of those business activities which mainly cater to the traveling public and which should be located on a major street. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the B-2 Roadside Business District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Uses permitted in the B-1 District. 
(2)  Dwellings, including mobile homes and mobile home parks. All mobile homes shall conform to the standards required by Section 6.2 B. 
(3)  Theaters or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
Sec. 5.6. - I-1, Light industrial district. 
The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended for the development of light manufacturing, wholesale and service establishments which do not create a nuisance but are appropriate for location on a major street or highway. Light manufacturing operations are those which utilize processed materials for assembly or fabrication in their operations as opposed to the processing of raw materials. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the I-1 Light Industrial District shall be used for following purposes: 
(1)  Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like. 
(2)  Food and kindred processing plants. 
(3)  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, and with equipment commonly used by contractors. 
(4)  Freight, truck yard or terminal. 
(5)  Warehouse and wholesale establishments. 
(6)  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(7)  Research or experimental stations and laboratories. 
(8)  Radio and/or television station with transmission towers. 
(9)  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional, or other general purpose. 
Sec. 5.7. - I-2, General industrial district. 
The I-2 General Industrial District is intended for the development of those heavy commercial and industrial establishments which may create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with or compatible with any of the development proposed for the other land use districts. This district is intended to accommodate the manufacturing or processing of raw materials. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the I-2 General Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the I-1 General Industrial District. 
(2)  Any industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations, or the storage and sale of raw or heavy materials, products or equipment. 
Sec. 5.8. - M-H, Mobile home park district. 
It is the purpose of the M-H Mobile Home Park District to provide sites for mobile homes in mobile home parks. This district establishes standards of performance and promotes the desirable benefits which planned mobile home developments may have upon the community and residents within them. It is further the intent of this district to ensure the interdependency and compatibility of proposed mobile home developments with essential utilities and surrounding land uses in the city. 
A.  Uses Permitted. In the M-H Mobile Home Park District. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Mobile home parks (See article Three, Definitions). 
(2)  Parks and Playgrounds. 
(3)  Laundromats. 
B.  Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article Eight, Section 8.5, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Uses which are in keeping with the intent of this district and which will serve exclusively the residents of that particular M-H district. 
Sec. 5.9. - A-F, General agriculture-forestry district. 
District Intent. To provide land for the production of agricultural products such as field crops, livestock, poultry and other conventional agricultural and forestry pursuits. This district is also created to assist in the conservation of natural resources by encouraging practices which will conserve soil and water resources. Utilities other than electricity and telephone should be provided by the land user in order to discourage the costly extension of public water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in an A-F, General Agriculture-Forestry District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling structure for farm owner, family or employee (including mobile homes). 
(2)  All agricultural-forestry land uses, buildings and activities. 
(3)  Churches. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Tree farms. 
(6)  Riding stables. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Parks, playgrounds. 
(9)  Country clubs, golf courses. 
(10)  Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges. 
(11)  Kennels, commercial. 
(12)  Accessory buildings and structures (must conform to area regulations—see Article Six). 
B.  Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article Eight, Section 8.5 and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Public buildings and utilities. 
(2)  Stadiums or race tracks. 
(3)  Radio or television stations. 
(4)  Airfields. 
(5)  Mineral Extraction industries (mining operations). 
Sec. 5.10. - C-I, Interchange commercial district. 
District Intent. This district is created to serve predominantly the needs of inter-regional traffic at interchanges on limited access thoroughfares. The uses allowed in this district should be limited to the needs of truckers and travelers, which are food, service, fuel and lodging. 
A.  Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a C-I, Interchange Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Filling Stations. 
(2)  Auto or truck repair shops. 
(3)  Restaurants and lounges. 
(4)  Hotels and motels. 
(5)  Gift shops. 
(6)  Tent and trailer campgrounds. 
(7)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to the above uses. 
B.  Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article Eight, Section 8.5 and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Banks. 
(3)  Professional and business offices. 
(4)  Plant nurseries. 
Sec. 5.11. - PD, Planned development district. 
District Intent. This district is reserved for establishment of shopping centers, planned residential areas, planned industrial developments and similar types of large-scale compatible use developments. The regulations are designed to permit the greatest latitude possible with respect to internal site planning considerations and location of these developments within the City in the interest of long-range development. This district encourages innovations in residential and non-residential development so that growing demands for housing and commercial areas may be met by a greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space as well as other natural amenities. Land for PD Districts must be obtained by the rezoning process (see Article Nine, Amendments). 
A.  Specific Requirements. In order to qualify for a Planned Development zoning classification, a proposed planned development must first meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The site utilized for Planned Developments must contain an area of not less than four acres. 
(2)  The site must have a minimum width between any two opposite boundary lines of 300 feet and must adjoin or have direct access to at least one improved public street. 
(3)  The application for amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the Planned Development. 
(4)  A suitable plot plan shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
(5)  A written report shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the Planning Commission and the city Council. 
B.  Application for Amendment. 
(1)  Any request pertaining to establishing a PD District shall be considered an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article Nine, Amendments. 
(2)  All information required in subsections 5.11D and 5.11F shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and subsequently forwarded to the City Council with the recommendations of the Planning Commission. 
(3)  If approved by the City Council, all information pertaining to the proposal shall be adopted as an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, to be the standards of development for that particular Planned Development District. 
(4)  Before approval of a Planned Development District, the City Council may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the City Attorney guaranteeing completion of the development according to the criteria listed herein. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount set by the City Council. 
C.  Sketch Plan for Planned Development. Prior to the filing of a plot plan for planned development, a sketch plan may be submitted to the City Building Inspector for review and recommendation and to the Planning Commission, if requested. The sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch. When submitted, the sketch plan shall include the following information. 
(1)  General information items: 
(a)  Name of the proposed development and developers. 
(b)  A north arrow. 
(c)  The boundary lines of the proposed development. 
(d)  The locations, name and right-of-way width of any existing streets within or adjacent to the proposed development. 
(2)  Proposed building sites and sizes, and the proposed layout of roads, parking areas and other features in relation to existing conditions. 
(3)  Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
(4)  Proposed means of water and sewage disposal. 
D.  Plot Plan for Planned Development. The plot plan drawn to scale (1" equals 100' or 1" equals 50') by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor or registered architect shall show the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration. The plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  General information items: 
(a)  Name of development and developers. 
(b)  A north arrow. 
(c)  Date of field survey. 
(d)  Tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearings and angles. 
(e)  Reference points to at least two permanent monuments. 
(2)  Proposed building sites and sizes. 
(3)  Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
(4)  All property dimensions. 
(5)  Platting and street systems: 
(a)  Proposed reservations or dedications for streets. 
(b)  Means of ingress and egress. 
(c)  Access and circulation arrangements. 
(d)  Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(6)  Means of protecting or screening abutting properties, including proposed landscaping. 
(7)  Location of proposed reservations, easements or dedications. 
(8)  If requested, two foot vertical contour intervals. 
E.  Written Report for Planned Development. A written report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development and shall include, where applicable: 
(1)  A general description of the proposal. 
(2)  A legal description of the site. 
(3)  Proposed standards for development including: 
(a)  Restrictions on the use of property. 
(b)  Density, yard and height requirements. 
(c)  Restrictive covenants. 
(4)  Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
(5)  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, if any are being requested. 
(6)  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities. 
(7)  Descriptions of percentage of land within the development to be provided for various uses: 
(a)  Residential. 
(b)  Commercial. 
(c)  Industrial. 
(d)  Open Space. 
(e)  Utilities. 
(f)  Parking and Storage. 
(g)  Others. 
F.  Permitted Uses. Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the planning Commission and City Council as being compatible with surrounding districts and the intent of the proposed PD District may be permitted. Thereafter, the uses permitted in the district shall be restricted to those proposed, approved and adopted according to procedures set forth herein. 
G.  General Design Criteria and Development Standards. 
(1)  Overall site design should be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, sizes and street patterns and use relationships. 
(2)  Variety in building types, heights, placement on lots and size of open spaces are encouraged if they are conducive to a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing living environment. 
(3)  The average density for residential dwelling units in a PD District should not exceed those set forth in the R-# District, although it may be clustered within the PD District. 
(4)  A 50 foot buffer strip with plant cover, trees and/or an attractive fence should be provided by the PD District, unless adjoining use is compatible. For instance, when one family and multi-family dwellings within a PD District are on property adjoining an R-3 District, then no buffer shall be required. 
(5)  Within a PD District, the design should include buffers suitable for screening residential areas from commercial or industrial uses when dangers of incompatibility exist. 
(6)  The sign and parking regulations of this ordinance should be accepted as minimum standards, and therefore creative improvements are encouraged. 
(7)  Shopping centers and other types of planned developments shall not have more than two access points to any one public street, unless unusual circumstances dictate the need for additional access points. 
(8)  All access points from a PD District should be located at least 100 feet from the intersection of any street. 
ARTICLE VI. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 6.1. - Area, yard and height requirements. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B- 2, I-1 and I-2 districts shall conform to the requirements listed on Schedule 1 (see next page). 

 
Notes: 
(a)  Interior units may have zero lot line; end units must be 8 feet from adjoining property line. 
(b)  See Section 6.2 for Mobile Home Park Regulations. 
(c)  If adjoining a non-residential district, as stated. If adjoining a residential district, twenty (20) feet. 
(d)  10,000 square feet is the minimum lot area with City water supply and sewage disposal; a minimum of 15,000 square feet shall be required if an individual sewage disposal system is proposed with City water supply; a minimum of 20,000 square feet shall be required if an individual sewage disposal system and private well are proposed. 
(e)  For two units; additional units require 2,000 square feet each. 
(f)  If adjoining a street, as stated. If adjoining a property line, 8 feet. 
(g)  If adjoining a street, as stated. If adjoining a property line, 15 feet. 
(h)  Except churches and cemeteries. 
Sec. 6.2. - Area regulations for M-H mobile home park district. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in [the] M-H Mobile Home Park District shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Mobile Home Parks. 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area. One (1) acre. 
(2)  Maximum Density. Seven (7) mobile homes per acre. 
(3)  Minimum Space Area. Each mobile home shall be located on a lot or space having an area of at least 4,000 square feet. 
(4)  Grading and Drainage. Each mobile home park shall be graded and drained to provide for the movement of stormwater to properly designed and approved drainage structures in accordance with applicable city standards and accepted design criteria. 
(5)  Mobile Home Placement and Separation. The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile home shall be 20 feet from side to side, 20 feet from side to rear and 15 feet from rear to rear; setback from interior driveways shall be at least 15 feet. 
(6)  Street Right-of-Way Clearance. No mobile home shall be located closer than 30 feet from street right-of-way lines and no closer than 20 feet from the property lines. 
(7)  Common Open Space. At least ten percent (10%) of the gross site area shall be set aside as common open space and recreational facilities (as described in Section A(2), Accessory Uses and Structures). Common open spaces shall be provided according to the following standards: 
(a)  Common open space shall not include streets, parking lots, public rights-of-way or sites for water and sewage treatment plants. 
(b)  Pedestrian and bicycle paths forming part of the common open space shall be paved and at least five (5) feet in width. 
(c)  Common open spaces shall be linked together or otherwise made available to all park residents. 
(8)  Buffer. There shall be a continuous planted buffer strip or solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence around all mobile home parks. Such buffer strips, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
(9)  Traffic Circulation. All mobile home parks shall be provided with an on-site paved street system providing safe, convenient and direct vehicular access to each mobile home space. All paving must meet City specifications as provided in the Woodbine Subdivision Regulations. Paved drives shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, and [with] [a] parking space of gravel, limerock, shell or similar all-weather surface sufficient to accommodate at least two (2) automobiles shall be located on each mobile home space. 
(10)  Landscaping. A minimum of three (3) trees shall be retained or planted at each mobile home stand. In the case of new plantings, no more than two (2) of the trees shall be of pine tree variety. 
B.  Additional Requirements. 
(1)  Mobile Home Placement. Mobile home supports or pillars shall be provided not more than 10 feet on center or less beginning from the front of the mobile home. Supports or pillars shall be placed upon concrete pads having minimum dimensions of 16"x16"x4". 
(2)  Anchoring. All mobile homes shall be anchored prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way. The anchoring system shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of ninety (90) miles per hour. 
(3)  Stability. All mobile homes shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be stabilized in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home shall permanently rest on wheels used to transport it. 
(4)  Skirts. All mobile homes shall prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed that are designed to complement the appearance of the mobile home and are coordinated throughout the park. Skirting shall be of solid material such as aluminum, galvanized metal, fiberglass or rigid plastic. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Non-conforming uses and structures. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, except that the non-conforming structure or use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use; or reestablished after discontinuance of more than one year; or extended except in conformity with this ordinance; or rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding fifty percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.2. - Off-street parking and loading. 
At least one off-street parking space for automobiles shall hereafter be provided on every lot for each dwelling unit, each 200 square feet of commercial floor area in the B-2 roadside Business District, and each 600 square feet of industrial or wholesale floor area in an I-1 or I-2 Industrial district. Each space shall be at least nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length, and shall have vehicular access to a public street. On every lot in a B-2, I-1 or I-2 district in which a business, trade or industry is hereafter established at least one (1) space for truck loading and unloading shall be provided for each 10,000 square feet of floor area; such space shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and twenty-five (25) feet in length. 
The lot area included in the setback and yard requirements for both Business and Industrial Districts shall be separate from the lot area required for off-street parking and loading in this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.3. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected without direct access to a public street, and no lot shall be created which does not abut on a public street. 
Sec. 7.4. - Lots of record. 
A.  No permit for the use of any lot which is smaller in total area than the minimum size permitted for the district within which it is located shall be issued unless said lot was legally and properly recorded prior to the passage of this ordinance. 
B.  Yards or lots recorded after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements established by this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.5. - Yard setbacks, exceptions. 
A.  Yard Setbacks in Residential Districts. 
The front yard setback requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than minimum setback required. In such cases, the front yard setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. 
The rear yard setback requirements of the residential districts shall not apply to accessory buildings or uses; except that garages and other accessory buildings or structures shall be no closer at any point than three (3) feet to the lot line. 
B.  Yard Setbacks in Business Districts. 
Front yard setback requirements in the business districts shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within seventy-five (75) feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setback. 
In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of setbacks of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
Where applications of the setback and side yard requirements in business districts would prohibit reasonable use of an existing lot, such requirements may be modified by variance to permit a principal building to extend beyond said setback and/or side yard requirements. In no case shall an extension of more than fifty percent (50%) of said requirements be permitted. 
Sec. 7.6. - Regulations for group developments. 
A group project (housing, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, civic) of two or more buildings to be constructed on a parcel of at least two (2) acres in area which will not be subdivided into customary lots and streets may be constructed, provided that: 
(1)  Uses shall be limited to those permitted within the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Density and building coverage requirements of the district are met. 
(3)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall be adequate to meet all setback and yard requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(4)  There shall be a continuous planted buffer strip or solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence where such group developments abut a residential district. Such buffer strips, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
Sec. 7.7. - One principal use allowed per lot. 
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one such building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.8. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation, if it is permitted in a land use district, must comply with the following requirements. It shall be allowed provided that it: 
(1)  Is conducted by no other persons than members of the family residing on the premises. 
(2)  Is conducted entirely within the principal building or completely enclosed accessory buildings. 
(3)  Utilizes not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the principal building, or fifty (50) percent of an accessory building. 
(4)  Produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior or change in the principal building from that of a dwelling. 
(5)  Involves no sale or offering for sale of any article not produced or assembled by members of the family, or any service not entirely performed by members of the family residing on the premises. 
(6)  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition. 
(7)  Is not visibly evident from the outside of the dwelling except by one non-illuminated sign, two square feet or smaller in size. 
Sec. 7.9. - Mobile home placement standards. 
All mobile homes located on individual lots in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to and conform with Section 6.2B, Additional Requirements. 
Sec. 7.10. - Development within areas of environmental constraint. 
The Land Use Plan Map designates certain areas in the city as having "severe environmental constraints." Such areas shall not be approved for rezoning nor shall any building permits be issued within such designated areas unless the developer sufficiently demonstrates the following: 
(1)  The development property in question is wrongly classified on the Land Use Plan. This shall be demonstrated by having the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) attest to the fact that said property is not on any of the following soils: 
Rains. 
Pelham. 
Bladen. 
Rutledge. 
Kingsland. 
Brookman. 
Meggett. 
Satilla. 
(2)  The development parcel does not frequently flood. This shall be attested to by the Solid Conservation Service. 
(3)  The development parcel is not a wetland. It should be noted that work in streams or their wetlands downstream of the headwaters (5 cfs annual average flow; approximately 5-7 square miles of drainage area for this part of Georgia) in natural ponds or lakes of 10 or more acres including their wetlands, or in any tidal area may require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit. Work upstream of the headwaters or in natural ponds or lakes of 10 acres or less may also need to be authorized by a COE permit. See 19 July 1977 Federal Register, Section 323.4. 
Additionally, saltwater wetlands are protected by the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (Ga. Law 1970, p. 939, section 1) and modification of these wetlands requires a permit from the Marshlands Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
That soil, flooding, and poor drainage conditions will be overcome satisfactorily by: 
(1)  Site modification; and/or 
(2)  The engineering design of structures, including foundation, buildings, roads and drainage structures. Plans showing these modifications shall bear the stamp of a Registered Professional Engineer. 
Sec. 7-11. - Private and public swimming pools. 
Any constructed or fabricated pool used for swimming or bathing, eighteen (18") or more in depth must be enclosed with a minimum four foot (4') high fence of chainlink or solid wood material and secured with a locked gate. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8.1. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City Administrator or other official designated by the Woodbine City Council. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, provide for other enforcement mechanisms that may be advantageous to the city. 
Sec. 8.2. - Certificate of zoning compliance and building permit. 
A.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to begin the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building, including accessory buildings, until the City Administrator or other official designated by the City Council has issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and the Camden County [City] Building Inspector has issued a Building Permit for such work. 
B.  Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the City Administrator, or other official designated by the City Council, a dimensioned sketch or scale plan indicating the shape, size and location of all buildings to be erected, and of any buildings already on the lot. 
(2)  Applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and structures. 
(3)  If the proposed work, as set forth in the application, conforms to the provisions of this ordinance, the City Administrator or other official designated by the City Council shall issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance upon payment of the required fee. 
(4)  If the Certificate of Zoning Compliance is refused, the City Administrator or other official designated by the City Council shall give the applicant a written explanation of the reasons for the refusal. 
(5)  Certificate of Zoning Compliance must be renewed if construction has not begun within six (6) months of the initial date of issue. 
C.  Issuance of Building Permit. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the Camden County [City] Building Inspector a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the proposal. The applicant shall also submit copies of the information required by Sections 8.2B(1) and (2). 
(2)  If the proposed work, as set forth in the application, conforms to the provisions of all applicable building codes and regulations as may be required in addition to the provisions of this ordinance, the Camden County [City] Building Inspector shall issue the Building Permit upon payment of the required fee. 
(3)  If the Building Permit is refused, the Camden County [City] Building Inspector shall give the applicant a written explanation of the reasons for the refusal. 
(4)  Building Permits must be renewed if construction has not begun within six (6) months of the initial date of issue. 
Sec. 8.3. - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  Certificate of Occupancy Required. No land or building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used until a Certificate of Occupancy has been granted. 
B.  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. 
(1)  Upon completion of any work for which a Building Permit and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance have been granted, application shall be made to the Camden County [City] Building Inspector for a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(2)  Within three (3) days of application, the Camden County [City] Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of the property and shall issue the Certificate of Occupancy if the work conforms to the necessary regulations. 
(3)  If the certificate is refused, the Camden County [City] Building Inspector must state such refusal in writing, with the cause. 
Sec. 8.4. - Temporary permit. 
The Woodbine Planning Commission is authorized to issue temporary permits for the following uses, subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such uses will cause no traffic congestion, and will not adversely affect surrounding areas. Any temporary use not allowed for in this ordinance shall be requested from the City Council. 
(1)  Carnival or circus, in approved open areas, for a period not to exceed three (3) weeks, and subject to approval by the City Council. 
(2)  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure, in an approved open area, for a period not to exceed forty (40) days. 
(3)  Open lot sale of Christmas trees, in an approved area, for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
(4)  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, for a period of twelve (12) months, provided that such an office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
Sec. 8.5. - Special use permits. 
A.  The uses listed under the various land use districts (Article Five) as "Special Permit Uses" are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district. However, the nature of such uses makes it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the special permit uses with other land uses located in the district. 
B.  Application and Review Process. 
(1)  When applying for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The applicant will be informed by the City that the proposed use is a Special Permit Use. The matter will then be referred to the Woodbine Planning Commission. 
(2)  An application shall be filed with the Woodbine Planning Commission no later than two weeks prior to its next regularly-scheduled meeting. Said application shall show the location or intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within three hundred (300) feet and any other material or information pertinent to the request which the Woodbine Planning Commission may require. 
(3)  The Planning Commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days of the date of application, prepare its report as to the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities, and other matters related to the general welfare. It will then authorize or deny the issuance of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. 
C.  Application Review Criteria. Special permit uses shall be permitted only upon authorization by the Woodbine Planning Commission, provided that such uses shall be found to comply with the following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this ordinance. 
(1)  The use shall be so designed, located and proposed to be operated so that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected. 
(2)  The use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located. 
(3)  The use will be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the land use district where it is to be located. 
(4)  Adequate landscaping and screening shall be provided as required. 
(5)  Adequate off-street parking and loading shall be provided, and ingress and egress shall be so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets. 
(6)  The use shall conform with all applicable regulations governing the district where located and all supplementary regulations and other requirements of this ordinance. 
(7)  All procedures, standards, rules and regulations shall be complied with as established by the Division of Children and Youth of the State Department of Family and Children Services for the licensing of Day Care Centers and Kindergartens. 
Sec. 8.6. - Variance. 
A.  The Woodbine Planning Commission may authorize a variance from the requirements of this ordinance where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific lot, strict application of the ordinance would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized with the one in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity and otherwise achieve the purposes of this ordinance. 
B.  Conditions Governing the Granting of a Variance. A variance may be granted by the Woodbine Planning Commission only in the event that all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owners of the property, since enactment of this ordinance, have had no control. 
(2)  The variance is necessary to provide the applicant the same basic property rights that other property owners in the same zone or vicinity possess. 
(3)  The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this ordinance, or to property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of any city plan or policy. 
(4)  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. 
C.  Procedure for Taking Action on a Variance Application. Variances shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
(1)  A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the Woodbine Planning Commission. All applications must be filed a minimum of two weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting where the request will be heard. 
(2)  The Planning Commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon. 
(3)  The Planning Commission shall render its decision on the application and forward copy of their decision to the Woodbine City Council for final approval or disapproval at their next meeting. 
(4)  Applicant shall be notified within five days of the final decision. 
D.  Time Limit on Permit for Variance. Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year unless substantial construction has taken place. However, the Planning Commission may extend authorization for an additional period not to exceed one year, upon request. 
Sec. 8.7. - Penalties for violation. 
In case any building or structure is demolished, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired, converted or maintained, or any structure or land is used in violation of any provision of this ordinance or any amendment hereto hereafter enacted, or in the event of the violation by any person or persons of the provisions of this ordinance or any such amendment, such violation shall be held to be a municipal offense, the charge for such violation hereof to be brought in and determined by the Municipal Court of Woodbine, Georgia, and the offender, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, either or both; and each day that any structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 8.8. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the City Government, the Camden County [City] Building Inspector or other City Resident who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to prevent the use of the building, structures or land. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 9.1. - Authority. 
This Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map of the City of Woodbine, may be amended from time to time by the City Council as herein provided. However, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days within which to submit its report. The sixty (60) days' time limit shall begin at the first public hearing of the Planning Commission, after the amendment is sent to the Planning Commission for review. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the sixty (60) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. However, the Planning Commission may consider an amendment beyond the sixty (60) day period, provided the applicant consents to such extension in writing. 
Sec. 9.2. - Procedure for amendments. 
Requests to amend the Zoning Ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Initiation Of Amendments. A proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the City Council, or by application filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner(s) of property. 
B.  Application For Amendments. 
1.  Application for amendment to the Ordinance, initiated by a party other than the City of Woodbine, shall be on a form approved by the City Council. Completed forms accompanied by a general layout plan and survey, if required, showing existing and proposed structures and uses, access drives, parking and loading areas, easements, utilities, signage, and any other supportive documentation required by the Planning Commission and/or City Council shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning Commission's scheduled meeting at which the application is to be heard. Any other communication purporting to be an application for amendment shall be regarded as mere notice of intention to seek an amendment. 
2.  Complete Application. An application is complete when all of the items required by these regulations and on the application form are prepared and/or answered, and any applicable fee has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 
a.  Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant with a written description of the missing information, defects, or other problems. No further action will be taken to process an incomplete application. 
b.  Appeal of a determination of incompleteness may be made to the Planning Commission. 
3.  Fees. Application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a receipt for all fees received. Zoning fees shall be submitted to the City to cover the cost of advertising and other administrative expenses. 
C.  Site Development Plan. Applications to rezone property, special use permit or conditional use permit for, Medium—High Density Residential, Central Business, Roadside Business, Light Industrial, General Industrial, Interchange Commercial, Mobile Home Park, Planned Development, shall be accompanied by a site development plan, prepared by an engineer, architect or surveyor at a scale of not less than 1" = 90', containing the following elements: 
a.  Dimensions of the property involved in square feet or acres; 
b.  Locations and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures with the type of usage; 
c.  Location of existing and proposed access drives with dimensions; 
d.  Location of existing and proposed setbacks with dimensions; 
e.  Location of existing and proposed easements with dimensions; 
f.  Location of existing and proposed rights-of-way with dimensions; 
g.  Marshland or wetland boundaries; 
h.  Proposed and existing water, sewer and drainage facilities; 
i.  Buffers; 
j.  Off-street parking and loading areas, including dimensions and identification of the total number of spaces required and the total number of spaces proposed; 
k.  Recreational areas with uses and dimensions; 
l.  Watercourses and lakes; 
m.  Proposed number of dwelling units and net acres available for building, in case of residential development; and 
n.  Loading areas, signage, off-street parking and outdoor lighting, in case of commercial; industrial development; and 
o.  If Planned Development, a written zoning text in accordance with Section 5.11E; 
p.  Identification of existing and proposed zoning; 
q.  Name, address, phone number, cell phone number, and e-mail address of record of landowner and architect/surveyor/engineer/planner/contractor; 
r.  A final sequence of development schedule showing the order of construction and approximate completion date. 
D.  Hearing By The Woodbine Planning Commission. The Woodbine Planning Commission, at a regular or scheduled meeting, shall review and prepare a report, including its recommendation, for transmittal to the Woodbine City Council for its consideration. The Woodbine Planning Commission shall have the right to adopt rules and regulations providing for [the] manner in which it will conduct its business including how notice of its meetings will be given to the public. 
Following action by the Woodbine Planning Commission, all papers and data pertinent to the application shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 
E.  Withdrawal. Upon withdrawal of an application after the Woodbine Planning Commission has taken formal action at a public hearing, an application shall not be initiated for an amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property, or any part thereof, by a property owner or owners for a period of six (6) months. 
Sec. 9.3. - Report of City of Woodbine Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission shall make a written report of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. The Planning Commission is required to include in its investigation and recommendation, comments on the following: 
A.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
B.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use and/or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
C.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
D.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use, which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
E.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
F.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property, which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
G.  Such other matters as the Planning Commission deems relevant. 
Sec. 9.4. - Public hearings. 
The City Council may, from time to time on its own motion or by recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend the regulations and districts herein after a public hearing has been held thereon. 
A.  Conduct of Public Hearings by the City Council. The policy and procedures for calling and conducting hearings before the City Council is as follows: 
1.  Zoning hearings shall be held during regular or scheduled meetings of the City Council, at a time and place provided in the published notice of the hearing. 
2.  The proposed zoning action and the party initiating said proposal for zoning action shall be stated, and the Mayor shall read the published notice of the proposed zoning action to be considered by the City Council. 
3.  A verbal staff report shall be made by City Staff, stating the recommendation of the Planning Commission and summarizing the written report submitted for the hearing, which written report shall include the general lines of inquiry of Section 9.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
4.  Both persons favoring and persons opposing a proposed zoning action shall have an opportunity to address the City Council. The party proposing a zoning amendment shall be invited to speak first, followed by persons opposed to the proposed zoning amendment. Each speaker will be asked to identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. When all opposing statements have been heard, the party proposing a zoning amendment may be permitted to rebut those statements. 
5.  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning amendment and shall address remarks only to the City Council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning action. The Mayor may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this requirement. 
6.  The proponents and the opposition of any zoning action shall have a total of 30 minutes each to address the City Council regarding the zoning action. Upon request made to and approved by the City Council prior to speaking, any single individual for or against a zoning action may speak for up to 15 minutes. All other speakers shall be limited to no more than 5 minutes unless permitted additional time by the City Council. Any allowance of additional time shall not extend the overall 30-minute time limit for a particular side of the zoning action unless more overall time is granted by the City Council to permit a more complete discussion of the issue. Any rebuttal by proponents shall be allowed only within the overall time constraints set out herein. Nothing in this [subsection] shall be construed to limit the ability of the Mayor to maintain decorum in the conduct of a hearing in a fair and orderly manner. 
7.  Because of time constraints in hearings, interested parties shall be encouraged to submit petitions, studies, letters, and other materials. Such materials, if presented orally at the hearing, shall be subject to the time limits provided above. 
8.  The City Council shall have discretion to call on previous speakers as necessary for clarification of views expressed or the materials submitted. The City Council may call for such additional view, studies, or other information from any source as then considered necessary to making a sound decision on the proposed zoning action. 
9.  The City Council shall have discretion to continue a hearing to a later date if the materials submitted or views expressed require more time for study and consideration than may reasonably be allocated in one meeting. 
B.  Conduct of Public Hearings Before the Planning Commission. Before taking action on any proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, conducted as follows, and printed copies of the following shall be available for distribution to the general public: 
1.  Public hearings shall be held in conjunction with regular or scheduled meetings of the Planning Commission, at a time and place provided in the published notice of the hearing. 
2.  The hearing shall be conducted by the Chairman or other hearing officer designated by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Upon the convening of the hearing, the Chairman shall read the published notice of the proposed zoning amendments to be considered by the planning Commission. Proposed zoning amendments then shall be considered in the order indicated by the published notice. 
4.  The proposed zoning amendment and the party initiating said proposal for zoning amendment shall be stated by the Chairman, who shall then call for a staff report on the proposed amendment. 
5.  No member of [the] Woodbine Planning Commission shall vote on a matter in which he has any pecuniary or special interest, and no staff member may represent an individual applicant or party. 
6.  A verbal staff report shall be made, stating the recommendation of the Zoning Staff and summarizing the written report submitted for the hearing, which written report shall include the general lines of inquiry of Section 9.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
7.  Both parties favoring and persons opposing a proposed zoning amendment shall have an opportunity to address the Planning Commission. The party proposing a zoning amendment shall be invited to speak first, followed by person favoring the proposed zoning amendment, and then by persons opposed to the proposed zoning amendment. The applicant may be represented by an agent or an attorney. Each speaker will be asked to identify himself or herself and state his/her address. When all opposing statements have been heard, the party proposing a zoning amendment may be permitted to rebut those statements. 
8.  The Chairman may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against the proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning amendment. 
9.  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning amendment and shall address remarks only to the Planning Commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning amendment. The Chairman may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this requirement. 
10.  Because of time constraints in hearings, interested parties shall be encouraged to submit petitions, studies, letters, and other materials requiring prior study in time to have them included in the final agenda for the hearing. The Planning Commission shall have discretion to accept such materials at the hearing if circumstances did not permit earlier submittal. Such materials, if presented orally at the hearing, shall be subject to the time limits provided herein. 
11.  Upon conclusion of public comments, as determined by the Chairman, conduct of the meeting shall be returned to the presiding official of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have discretion to call on previous speakers as necessary for clarification of views expressed or the materials submitted. 
12.  Nothing in this shall be construed to limit the ability of the Chairman to maintain decorum in the conduct of a hearing, in a fair and orderly manner. 
13.  The Planning Commission shall have discretion to continue a hearing to a later date if the materials submitted or views expressed require more time for study and consideration than may reasonably be allocated in one meeting. 
14.  The Planning Commission may call for such additional views, studies, or other information from any source as then considered necessary to making a sound decision on the proposed zoning amendment. 
Sec. 9.5. - Notice of public hearing. 
A.  If the rezoning decision is initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission, interested parties shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the public hearing by placement of notice in the City's legal organ. Said notice shall contain the date, time, and place of the public hearing and a description of the proposed amendments together with a list or map of the properties that may be affected thereby. 
B.  If an application is initiated by a party other than the City Council or the Planning Commission, the public shall be notified by posting on the subject property in conspicuous location a sign containing the date, time, and place of public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed zoning classification and proposed use of the property. The property shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  In addition, the public shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the public hearing by placement of notice in the City's legal organ. Said notice shall contain general location of the property, present zoning classification of the property, proposed zoning classification, the proposed use of the property and the date, time and place of public hearing. 
D.  The City Clerk shall, in the case of a proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Maps, use his or her best efforts to mail notice of public hearing to all property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the property sought to be rezoned, as their names appear on the records of the Camden County Board of Tax Assessors. 
E.  The applicant shall be informed in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date, time and place of the public hearing by the City Council. 
F.  Paragraph (b) [B] shall only apply when the application or amendment is initiated by a person or organization other than the City Council or Planning Commission. 
Sec. 9.6. - Withdrawal. 
A.  Once an application for an amendment has been submitted and advertised, the applicant may withdraw the application or request a postponement of the hearing date once by submitting to the City Clerk in writing his request, at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
B.  In the absence of request for continuance, the zoning item will be heard on the date scheduled unless the City Council takes action to defer the zoning item. The City may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the cost of placing one advertisement in the Tribune & Georgian advising the public that the continuance shall be rescheduled to the next succeeding regular or scheduled meeting date of the City Council or the date specified in a motion adopted by the City Council. If the applicant fails to appear on date set for the public hearing, the City Council may proceed to dispose of the zoning request or dismiss the application. 
Sec. 9.7. - Notice. 
Property owners whose property is affected by a zoning decision will receive written notice thereof within seven (7) days after the decision is made by the City Council. 
Sec. 9.8. - Final action by the city council. 
Upon action of denial by the City Council, an application shall not be initiated for an amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property, or any part thereof, by a property owner or owners for a period of one (1) year. 
Sec. 9.9. - Changes to the zoning map. 
Following final action by the City Council, all necessary changes shall be made on the zoning map by the City Official in charge of the Zoning Maps. A written record of the type and date of such change shall be maintained by the City Clerk. Until such change is made, no action by the City Council on amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be official. 
Sec. 9.10. - Conditional rezoning. 
In adopting an amendment to the Zoning Map, the Planning Committee may recommend and the City Council may impose conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested rezoning acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the district(s) involved and the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
A.  Such conditions may consist of, but are not limited to: 
1.  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
2.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; 
3.  Restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; 
4.  Maximum building heights or other dimensions; 
5.  Special drainage or erosion materials; 
6.  Landscaping or planted areas which may include the location, type and maintenance of plan materials; 
7.  Fences, walls, berms or other buffering provisions or protective measures; 
8.  Preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; 
9.  Measures to alleviate undesirable light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
10.  The length of time the rezoning shall remain valid or otherwise revert to the original zoning without the issuance of a Building Permit and the initiation of construction in accordance with the Sequence of Development Schedule; or 
11.  Any other physical requirement the Planning Commission and/or the City Council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning. 
B.  Such Conditions: 
1.  Shall only be valid if they are included in the amendment as adopted. 
2.  Shall be in effect for the period of time specified in the amendment, or for ten (10) years if no period of time is specified. 
3.  Shall be required for the property owner as a condition of use of the property as rezoned for so long as the conditions are in effect. 
Sec. 9.11. - Construction to be in accordance with approved site plan. 
No Building Permit shall be issued for any proposed construction that does not conform to the final, approved site plan submitted in support of the rezoning in accordance with Section 9.2C, Site Development Plan. Revision to a site plan approved as part of a rezoning must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council prior to issuance of a Building Permit, provided, however, the City Administrator may approve minor changes to a site plan approved as part of a rezoning prior to the issuance of a Building permit. Minor changes would constitute slight alterations made necessary by actual field conditions at the time of development that do not alter the impact of the development on nearby properties, nor the intent or integrity of the site plan as approved as part of the rezoning. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - Scope of article. 
These regulations shall govern and control the erection, remodeling, enlarging, moving, operation and maintenance of all signs within all land use districts established by this ordinance. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation applicable to signs. 
Sec. 10.2. - Definitions. 
(1)  "Sign:" Every name, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, flag, illustration or insignia and the structure displaying or supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon land, which directs attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, except air navigational signs. 
(2)  "Business Sign:" A sign which directs attention to a profession or business conducted, or to a commodity, service activity or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or on the building to which such sign is affixed. 
(3)  "Flashing Sign:" Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light or lights are not maintained in a satisfactory condition or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is illuminated. A sign whereon the time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the lighting changes are limited to the numerals indicating the time and/or temperature. 
(4)  "Ground Sign:" Any sign or other advertising structure, supported by a pole, pylon or uprights or braces placed upon the ground, and not attached to any building or structure. 
(5)  "Identification Sign:" Any sign which contains the name and/or address of the owner or occupant. An identification sign may be either a wall sign or a ground sign. 
(6)  "Illuminated Sign:" Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or any other means of artificial illumination. 
(7)  "Instructional Sign:" Any sign which notifies or instructs the public as to limitations or regulations relating to designated uses of certain parcels of property or public or private streets or rights-of-way and which includes warning signs, exit signs, traffic signs and directional signs for parking or parking restrictions. An instructional sign may be either a wall sign or a ground sign. 
(8)  "Other Advertising Structure:" Any marquee, fixed canopy, fixed or retractable awning, and which includes, as a part thereof, any sign, as described and set forth in Subsection (1) of this Section, displayed thereon or affixed thereto. 
(9)  "Outdoor Advertising Sign (Billboard):" A sign which directs attention to a business, service, product, etc. that is not available or conducted upon the premises where such sign is located (off-premises signs). 
(10)  "Projecting Sign:" Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of the said building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached by more than 12 inches. 
(11)  "Roof Sign:" Any sign erected, constructed and maintained upon or over the roof or top of the wall, wall tower or turret of any building with the principal support on the roof structure. 
(12)  "Surface Area of Sign:" Shall be computed as follows: 
a.  "Wall Signs:" For a sign fixed against the surface of a wall of a building, the sign area shall include the background, surrounding bands, moldings or margins comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. 
For a sign constructed of either freestanding or individual letters, figures or characters, not attached to a baseboard, but individually attached to the wall of a building or other structure, sign area shall be the product of the height of the letters, figures or characters and the length of the same. The height of the letters, figures or characters shall be determined by the tallest letter. 
b.  "Ground Signs:" For signs mounted on self-supporting structures not attached to a building, the sign area shall be the sum of the area of each face or the surface upon which the message, device or design is mounted including a double or multiple-face sign. The distance between sign faces on a multiple-face sign, where such distance does not exceed 12 inches, shall not be considered in computing sign area, nor shall the structural elements or supports which do not comprise part of the sign face be included in computing sign area. 
(13)  "Temporary Sign:" Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only as regulated by the provisions of this article. 
(14)  "Wall Sign:" Any sign attached to and supported by the exterior surface of the wall of a building or structure in a plane substantially parallel to that of the supporting wall. 
Sec. 10.3. - General provisions. 
The following regulation shall apply to all permitted signs in the City of Woodbine: 
A.  A Building Permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise specified. 
B.  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this ordinance. 
C.  Signs must be constructed of durable materials maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
D.  No signs, except as otherwise specified, shall exceed the height limit of the district in which they are located. 
E.  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product, or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of said activity. 
F.  All signs shall be designated and constructed to withstand a wind velocity of not less than 25 miles per hour. 
Sec. 10.4. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
B.  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
C.  Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles or fence posts are prohibited. 
D.  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
Sec. 10.5. - Signs not requiring a permit (exempt signs). 
The following types of signs are generally exempt from the provisions of this article and do not require a permit, excepting those found to be in violation of the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Plaques or tablets, denoting names of buildings and date of erection or names of buildings or dates cut into any masonry surface. 
(2)  Traffic and other signs erected and maintained by the city of other governmental agency, legal notices and all other similar signs required by law to be posted. 
(3)  Decorations displayed in connection with civic, patriotic or religious holidays. 
(4)  Flags, emblems and insignia of political, civic, philanthropic, religious or educational organizations temporarily displayed for non-commercial purposes. 
(5)  One non-illuminated "For Sale," "For Rent" or "For Lease" sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area in residential districts and twenty (20) square feet in other than residential districts and located not less than two (2) feet back from the street right-of-way line, unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
(6)  Permitted home occupation signs subject to the regulations of this article. 
Sec. 10.6 - Signs permitted in residential land use districts (R-1, R-2 and R-3). 
A.  Permitted Signs. The following signs shall be permitted in residential land use districts only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use of a lawfully established special use: 
(1)  Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs pertaining to the lease, rental, management or sale of the premises upon which located, provided that such signs are removed within ten (10) days after the execution of a contract for sale or lease of said premises. 
(2)  Construction Signs. Signs identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing or development when placed upon the premises where work is under construction, but only for the duration of construction or wrecking. 
(3)  Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of said institutions. 
(4)  Identification Signs. Identification signs containing only the name and/or address of the dwelling occupant or of the dwelling, or of the dwelling owner or manager. 
(5)  Instructional Signs. Instructional signs which notify or instruct the public as to limitations or regulations relating to designated uses of certain parcels of property or public or private streets or rights-of-way, and including warning signs, exit signs, traffic signs and directional signs for parking or parking restrictions. 
(6)  Temporary Signs. When approved as provided in this article. 
B.  Permitted Sign Types. 
(1)  Non-projecting wall signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
C.  Number, Height, Area and Location. 
(1)  Permitted Number. Only one sign shall be permitted for each principal permitted use on a zoning lot except that one additional identification sign shall be permitted where the principal use has more than one principal access or a secondary access to a public way, and except that the number of instructional signs shall be limited to the number reasonably necessary to instruct and inform the public as determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission. 
(2)  Maximum Height Above Nearest Street Grade. 
(a)  Wall Signs—20 feet. 
(b)  Ground Signs—7 feet. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  Real Estate Signs—12 Square Feet. 
(b)  Construction Signs—18 Square Feet. 
(c)  Bulletin Boards—18 Square Feet. 
(d)  Identification Signs—10 Square Feet. 
(e)  Instructional Signs—6 Square Feet. 
(f)  Temporary Signs—As Authorized. 
(4)  Permitted Location. Signs shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which they are accessory but may not be located: 
(1)  Nearer than fifteen (15) feet to the front lot line; or 
(2)  Nearer than fifteen (15) feet to a corner side lot line; or 
(3)  Nearer than ten (10) feet to the interior side lot line; or 
(4)  Nearer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line of any zoning lot except that temporary signs may be located as authorized pursuant to Section 10.10 hereof, and except that instructional signs may be at such locations as are approved by the Woodbine Planning Commission. 
D.  Illumination. Permitted signs may be illuminated but only from a concealed light source and may not be flashing signs as herein defined. The intensity of the illumination shall only be such as is reasonably necessary to enable the sign to be viewed from the nearest public right-of-way. 
Sec. 10.7. - Signs permitted in mobile home land use districts (M-H). 
A.  Permitted Signs. The following signs shall be permitted in Mobile Home Land Use Districts only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted or lawfully established special use: 
(1)  Any sign permitted in a Residential Land Use District and subject to the same regulations as to number, height, location and area unless otherwise provided. 
(2)  Laundromats and approved special permit uses may be allowed one business sign for each separate and distinct use. 
B.  Permitted Sign Types. 
(1)  Non-projecting wall signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
C.  Number, Height, Area and Location. 
(1)  Permitted Number. Only one sign shall be permitted for each principal permitted use on a zoning lot except that one additional identification sign shall be permitted where the principal use has more than one principal access or a secondary access to a public way, and except that the number of instructional signs shall be limited to the number reasonably necessary to instruct and inform the public as determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission. Additionally, in the case of a Mobile Home Park, the Woodbine Planning Commission may authorize one sign to be permitted for a principal use on a mobile home space which meets the minimum requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  Maximum Height Above Nearest Street Grade. 
(a)  Wall Signs—20 Feet. 
(b)  Ground Signs—7 Feet. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  Real Estate Signs—12 Square Feet. 
(b)  Business Signs—18 Square Feet. 
(c)  Construction Signs—18 Square Feet. 
(d)  Bulletin Boards—18 Square Feet. 
(e)  Identification Signs—10 Square Feet. 
(f)  Instructional Signs—6 Square Feet. 
(g)  Temporary Signs—As Authorized. 
(4)  Permitted Location. Same as Section 10.6C(4) of this ordinance. 
D.  Illumination. Same requirements as Section 10.6D of this ordinance. 
Sec. 10.8. - Signs permitted in the central business land use district (B-1). 
A.  Permitted Signs. The following signs only shall be permitted in the B-1, Central Business District and then only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted or lawfully established special use in said districts: 
(1)  Any sign permitted in a residential land use district (Section 10.6) and subject to the same regulations as to number, height, location and area unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  Business signs. 
(3)  Identification signs containing only the name and/or address of the owner or business establishment. 
(4)  Temporary signs when approved as provided by this article. 
B.  Permitted Sign Types. 
(1)  Non-projecting wall signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
C.  Number, Height, Area and Location. 
(1)  Permitted Number. 
(a)  Wall Signs—No more than one wall sign on each wall fronting on a public street, public right-of-way or easement, except for identification signs as hereinafter provided, and except for multiple tenant buildings where one wall sign for each business or professional use shall be permitted. 
(b)  Ground Signs—No more than one ground sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot except for identification signs as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Identification Signs—One each for the principal and secondary access to the zoning lot. 
(d)  Temporary Signs—As Authorized. 
(2)  Maximum Height Above Nearest Street Grade. 
(a)  Wall Signs—Roof line of the building to which sign is attached except for a multiple tenant building where wall signs (except identification signs) shall not be permitted higher than the second floor level. 
(b)  Ground Signs—20 Feet. 
(3)  Maximum area. 
(a)  Wall Signs—Eight percent (8%) of the area of the building wall to which the sign is affixed or 80 square feet, whichever is greater; except that those businesses choosing to erect only one wall sign on the premises and further provided that no other signs are placed on the premises shall be allowed a maximum area of twelve percent (12%) of the building wall to which the wall sign is affixed or 120 square feet whichever is greater. 
(b)  Ground Signs—32 square feet for each exposed face but not to exceed a total aggregate surface area of 62 square feet. 
(c)  Identification Signs—10 Square Feet. 
(4)  Permitted Location. Signs shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which they are accessory and except as hereinafter provided shall not be located in any required yard area provided that temporary signs may be located where authorized pursuant to this article. 
(a)  Wall Signs—On each wall of the principal building fronting on a public street or public right-of-way or easement. 
(b)  Ground Signs—May be located in a required front, side or rear yard but shall not extend over any lot line. 
(c)  Identification Signs—Adjacent to the principal or secondary entrance to the principal building or zoning lot. 
D.  Illumination. 
(1)  Permitted signs may be illuminated by fixed light, either internal or external provided that such illumination shall be of such intensity and so concentrated and directed so as to prevent any glare or direct rays upon adjoining streets and property. Flashing signs are expressly prohibited. 
(2)  Any illuminated sign located within 120 feet of a residential zone shall be extinguished at the close of business conducted within any building or upon the premises to which such sign is attached or located, or at 11:00 p.m., whichever is later. 
Sec. 10.9. - Signs permitted in the roadside business, light industrial and general industrial districts (B-2, I-1 and I-2). 
A.  Permitted Signs. The following signs only shall be permitted in the B-2, I-1 and I-2 land use districts and then only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted or lawfully established special use in said district: 
(1)  Any sign permitted in a residential land use district (Section 10.6) and subject to the same regulations as to number, height, location and area unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  Business signs. 
(3)  Identification signs containing only the name and/or address of the owner or business establishment. 
(4)  Outdoor advertising. 
(5)  Temporary signs when approved as provided by this article. 
B.  Permitted Sign Types. 
(1)  Non-projecting wall signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
(3)  Roof signs. 
C.  Number, Height, Area and Location. 
(1)  Permitting Number. On any occupied zoning lot in a B-2, I-1 or I-2 land use district not more than three signs of any type shall be permitted except as otherwise provided for herein. 
(a)  Wall Signs—No more than one wall sign on each wall fronting on a public street, public right-of-way or easement, except for identification signs as hereinafter provided, and except for multiple tenant buildings where one wall sign for each business or professional use shall be permitted. 
(b)  Ground Signs—No more than one ground sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot except for identification signs as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Identification Signs—One each for the principal and secondary access to the zoning lot. 
(2)  Maximum Height Above Nearest Street Grade. 
(a)  Wall Signs—Roof line of the building to which sign is attached except for a multiple tenant building where wall signs (except identification signs) shall not be permitted higher than the second floor level. 
(b)  Ground Signs—20 Feet. 
(c)  Roof Signs—12 feet above the roof line of the building to which the sign is attached. 
(d)  Outdoor Advertising Signs—18 feet above the nearest street grade. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  Wall Signs—Ten percent (10%) of the area of the building wall to which the sign is affixed or 100 square feet, whichever is greater; except that those businesses choosing to erect only one wall sign on the premises and further provided that no other signs placed on the premises shall be allowed a maximum area of 14% of the building wall to which the wall sign is affixed or 140 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Ground Signs—40 square feet for each exposed face but not to exceed a total aggregate surface area of 80 square feet. 
(c)  Identification Signs—10 Square Feet. 
(d)  Roof Signs—90 square feet total aggregate surface area. 
(e)  Outdoor Advertising Signs—300 Square Feet. 
(4)  Permitted Location. Signs shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which they are accessory and except as hereinafter provided shall not be located in any required yard area, provided that temporary signs may be located where authorized pursuant to this article. 
(a)  Walls Signs—On each wall of the principal building fronting on a public street or public right-of-way or easement. 
(b)  Ground Signs—May be located in a required front, side or rear yard but shall not extend over any lot line. 
(c)  Identification Signs—Adjacent to the principal or secondary entrance to the principal building or zoning lot. 
(d)  Roof signs—Must be located on the roof of the principal use to which they are accessory. 
(e)  Outdoor Advertising Signs—Shall be located no closer than 500 feet to other outdoor advertising signs on the same side of the road. A planted screen shall be required at the base of all outdoor advertising structures. 
D.  Illumination. Same requirements as detailed in Section 10.8D. 
Sec. 10.10. - Temporary signs. 
The Woodbine Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions and subject to the standards herein, is authorized to issue permits for the erection and maintenance of temporary signs for a period not to exceed 30 days (except as provided for political signs) at the expiration of which period the permittee shall remove such temporary signs. 
A.  Permitted Temporary Signs. 
(1)  Business signs calling attention to a special, unique, or limited activity, service, product or sale of limited duration. 
(2)  Signs advertising political candidates or parties, provided that such signs may not be erected or maintenanced more than 30 days prior to the next election to which such signs are applicable and shall be removed within 10 days following such election. 
(3)  Signs giving notice of events and activities sponsored by civic, patriotic or religious organizations for non-commercial purposes. 
B.  Permitted Sign Types. 
(1)  Non-projecting wall signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
(3)  Streamers, banners, flags, pennants and similar temporary signs as herein defined. 
C.  Number, Height, Area and Location. 
(1)  Permitted Number. As determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose, provided that no more than four (4) permits for temporary business signs shall be issued for the same zoning lot in one calendar year. 
(2)  Maximum Height. As determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public safety and considerations related to the material and manner of construction and the size and location thereof. 
(3)  Maximum Area. As determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public safety and considerations related to the material and manner of construction and the size and location thereof. 
(4)  Permitted Location. 
(a)  Temporary Business Signs—Subject to the same regulations as business signs. 
(b)  Political Signs—On private property (with consent of the owner) and along and upon public street rights-of-way (but not across, over or extending into or onto the paved portion of any public street) as determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission in accordance with public safety requirements and considerations related to the material and manner of construction and the size and location thereof. 
(c)  Other Permitted Temporary Signs—As determined by the Woodbine Planning Commission to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public safety. 
D.  Illumination. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
Sec. 10.11. - Signs permitted in interchange commercial district (C-I). 
1.  Permitted Signs. The following signs only shall be permitted in the C-I, Interchange Commercial District, and then only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted or lawfully established special use in said district: 
(a)  On any occupied zoning lot in this district, not more than four (4) signs of any type having a total area of not more than 750 square feet shall be permitted. 
(b)  Commercial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in this district may include as part of their total permitted sign area one (1) business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten (10) feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
(c)  Outdoor advertising sign structures, each of which does not exceed 600 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted providing they are spaced not closer than 500 feet from any other such sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on an interchange commercial zoned lot. 
(d)  Signs in the Interchange Commercial District may be illuminated. 
(e)  Each commercial use in a C-I District shall be allowed one business identification sign not to exceed 80 feet in height as part of its total permitted sign area. 
(f)  Within an Interchange Commercial District, there shall be a limit of three (3) outdoor advertising signs per quadrant in any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway and these three (3) signs are restricted to an area 1,200 feet in length beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
Sec. 10.12. - Signs permitted in agriculture-forestry district (A-F). 
A.  Permitted Signs. The following signs only shall be permitted in the A-F, Agriculture-Forestry District, and then only if necessarily and customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted or lawfully established special use in said district: 
(1)  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(2)  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or business identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area. Such sign shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
Sec. 10.13. - Signs permitted in planned development district (PD). 
A.  Permitted Signs. Only those signs incorporated in plans for Planned Developments approved by the Planning Commission are permitted in Planned Development Districts. The regulations of this article shall serve as minimum requirements for signs in PD Districts. 
ARTICLE XI. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Sec. 11.1. - The following fees have been set by the woodbine planning commission for services listed below. 

 
ARTICLE XII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12.1. - Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. 12.2. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 10.3 [12.3]. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 10.4 [12.4]. - Effective date. 
Adopted and approved by the Woodbine City Council after public hearing held on the 4th day of March, 1985. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1985 Code included herein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of adopted legislation which is included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 