CODE OF ORDINANCES City of DUBLIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER  AND  GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: April 3, 1978  Effective: July 1, 1978 
____________ 
Published in 1978 by Order of the Mayor and the City Council 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF DUBLIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
PHIL BEST  Mayor 
____________ 
WILLIAM C. BROWN, III  JERRY DAVIS  BENNIE JONES  GARY JOHNSON  GERALD SMITH, JR.  CURTIS EDWARDS, JR.  PAUL GRIGGS  Council Members 
____________ 
JOSHUA POWELL  City Attorney 
____________ 
HAROLD D. McLENDON  City Judge 
____________ 
LANCE JONES  City Manager 
____________ 
R. BLAKE DANIELS  Finance Director/City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Dublin of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 6 is 6-3. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-2 and 4-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-2.1, 4-2.2, 4-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as Chapter 12½. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them, and in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Ronald K. McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
Special appreciation is due to Mr. James V. Hilburn, City Attorney, and Mr. James H. Crowdis, III, City Manager, for their cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. 
April, 1978 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, Georgia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Effective Date of such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Dublin, Georgia: 
Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 24, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, Georgia" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen on or before June 28, 1976, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the first day of July in the year 1978, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Dublin, enacted on final passage on or before June 28, 1976, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the first day of July in the year 1978, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the City, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; 
(c)  Any administrative ordinance of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(d)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the City; 
(e)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(f)  Any right or franchise granted by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen to any person, firm or corporation; 
(g)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
(h)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; 
(i)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(j)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City or providing regulations for the same; 
(k)  Any ordinance regulating zoning and subdivisions in the City; or any amendment thereto; 
(l)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the City, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law and is not inconsistent with such Code; 
(m)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof; 
(n)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as speed limitations, parking prohibitions and restrictions, through streets, stop and/or yield intersections, truck routes, one-way streets, etc.; 
(o)  Any ordinance enacted after June 28, 1976. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of such Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or for imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both of these punishments, as provided in Section 1-10 of such Code. 
Section 5.  That any and all additions or amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, Georgia" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  That in case of the amendment by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and Section 1-10 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7.  That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all ordinances which indicate the intention of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen to make the same a part of such when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8.  That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Dublin to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin and in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9.  That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10.  That this ordinance shall become effective on the first day of July, 1978. 
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN on this 3rd day of April, 1978. 
(SEAL) 
/s/ Robert E. Cochran  Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Patsy H. Daniel  City Clerk 
/s/ Emery H. Palmer  Alderman 
/s/ Lena H. Opie  Alderman 
/s/ Eddie E. Mackey  Alderman 
/s/ Joel E. Radney, D.C.  Alderman 
/s/ Vernon De Loach  Alderman 
/s/ E.C. Thomas  Alderman 
/s/ Albert Franks  Alderman 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I consists of the Charter of the City of Dublin, H.B. No. 1578, Act No. 968, of the 1978 Session of the General Assembly. Any material in brackets [] has been added by the editor for purposes of clarity. Amended sections are indicated by history notes enclosed in parentheses () at the ends of such sections. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS, BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation; name; corporate powers. 
The City of Dublin, Georgia, in the County of Laurens, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Dublin (hereinafter at times referred to as the "city"). The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the city as heretofore incorporated and shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the city; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of any of such property; and may have a common seal and alter and review the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Section 1.2. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Dublin, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  The corporate limits of the City of Dublin shall not contain either of the following described tracts of land: 
(1)  All that certain tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 93 in the 1st Land District of Laurens County, Georgia, containing fifty (50) acres, more or less, and more particularly described by reference to a plat of survey made by Daniel R. Riggs, Surveyor, on September 9, 1977, and described as the Fire Tower Road, Pecan Grove Subdivision, Section 1, as shown by said plat, a copy of which is recorded in the office of the Clerk of Laurens Superior Court in Deed Book 350, page 63. The recorded plat and the courses and distances shown thereon are incorporated into and made a part of this description by reference thereto. 
(2)  All that certain tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 91 in the 1st Land District of Laurens County, Georgia, containing 51.12 acres, as shown by a plat of survey made by J. D. Glover, Surveyor, on July 1—3, 1972, and recorded in Deed Book 300, page 251, in the office of the Clerk of Laurens Superior Court. The recorded plat and the description contained therein are made a part hereof by reference. 
Section 1.3. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present and any future constitution and statute of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.4. - Specified powers. 
The corporate powers of this city shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Property taxes—To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  Other taxes—To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation—To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(4)  Appropriations and expenditures—To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditures of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter, and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(5)  Municipal debts—To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(6)  Municipal property ownership—To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(7)  Gifts—To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(8)  Condemnation—To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or under other applicable public acts as have been or may be enacted; 
(9)  Municipal utilities—To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, both within and beyond the corporate limits of the City of Dublin, Georgia, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewerage disposal, natural gas, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports and any other public utility; to determine and classify the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same in the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; to pass such ordinances as deemed suitable to protect such property and appurtenances and to enforce compliance by suitable penalties; and to make such contracts, agreements and arrangements as deemed necessary or desirable in the exercise of these powers; 
(10)  Public utilities and services—To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public service; 
(11)  Roadways—To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  Public improvements—To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  Sidewalk maintenance—To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  Building regulation—To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air-conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license the construction and erection of buildings, and all other structures; 
(15)  Planning and zoning—To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulation and the like as the mayor and council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(16)  Public peace—To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(17)  Special areas of public regulation—To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawnshops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune-telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(18)  Regulation of roadside areas—To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(19)  Health and sanitation—To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(20)  Air and water pollution—To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(21)  Fire regulations—To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(22)  Public hazards, removal—To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(23)  Solid waste disposal—To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(24)  Garbage fees—To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(25)  Sewer fees—To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to ensure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(26)  Nuisance—To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(27)  Municipal property protection—To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(28)  Jail sentences—To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(29)  Animal regulations—To regulate and license, or prohibit, the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(30)  Motor vehicles—To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(31)  Taxicabs—To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(32)  Pensions—To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Special assessments—To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(34)  Contracts—To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be made therefor; 
(35)  City agencies and delegations of power—To create, alter or abolish departments; boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(36)  Penalties—To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(37)  Police and fire protection—To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to organize and operate a fire-fighting agency; 
(38)  Emergencies—To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(39)  Urban redevelopment—To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(40)  Public transportation—To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(41)  General health, safety, and welfare—To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(42)  Other powers—To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, Act No. 856, § 1) 
Section 1.5. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Section 2.1. - Mayor and council; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a mayor and a city council composed of seven (7) council members. Four (4) council members shall be ward council members and three (3) council members shall be council members at large. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided in Article III of this Charter. 
Section 2.2. - Mayor and council; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the mayor and members of the city council shall serve terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  To be eligible for election as mayor or council member at large, a person must be a registered and qualified voter of the city at the time of qualifying for office, and must continue to reside therein during the term of the office. To be eligible for election as a ward council member, a person must be a resident of the ward at the time of qualifying for office, and must continue to reside therein during the term of office. A person must be twenty-five (25) years of age at the time of qualifying for mayor and twenty-one (21) years of age at the time of qualifying for council member. 
(c)  In order to qualify for the office, the person elected or appointed shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of Mayor (or Council member, as the case may be) of the City of Dublin, to the best of my skill and ability, and as to me shall seem to be for the best interest and welfare of the City, without fear, favor, or affection, so help me God." 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city, the term of council members was changed from two to four years to conform to Georgia Code § 21-3-63, Municipal office terms to be for four years; commencement of terms of municipal offices. 
Section 2.3. - Compensation. 
The mayor and council shall receive as compensation for their services an amount set by ordinance. The mayor and council shall establish a policy for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by its members in the performance of their official duties. 
Section 2.4. - Mayor; powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the official head of the city government and chief representative of the city and it shall be the mayor's duty: 
(1)  To preside at meetings of the mayor and council. The mayor shall have all the rights, powers, and duties and responsibilities as a council member except that the mayor shall be entitled to vote on matters before the mayor and council only in the following instances: 
(a)  When there is an equal division on the question, and then the mayor shall determine the matter by his vote; 
(b)  On the adoption of an emergency ordinance; 
(c)  In proceedings for the removal of a council member; and 
(d)  To veto ordinances as provided herein. 
(2)  As provided by law or by action of the mayor and council, to sign contracts on behalf of the city; 
(3)  To keep informed about financial and other affairs of the city, and from time to time to present information about the affairs of the city and to recommend such measures as deemed best for the city. Including statements and reports to the citizens concerning the affairs of the city; 
(4)  To serve as a member of boards, commissions and committees required by law or by action of the mayor and council; and 
(5)  To perform such other duties consistent with this Charter and as may be required by the council. 
Section 2.5. - Organization meeting; oath, election of mayor pro tempore. 
The mayor and council shall meet for organization in the council chamber on the date and at the time of the first regular meeting in January following each regular municipal election, or if that date is a legal holiday, on the next following day not a legal holiday. At the organizational meeting, the mayor, if newly elected, and each newly elected council member shall qualify by taking the oath of office prescribed herein. The oath shall be administered by a person authorized to administer oaths. The organization of the mayor and council shall take place notwithstanding the absence, death, refusal to serve, failure to qualify, or nonelection of one or more members, but at least a quorum of the members must be present. Following the induction of new members, the mayor and council, by majority vote, shall elect a council members to serve as mayor pro tempore, who shall serve at its pleasure and until a successor is elected. 
Section 2.6. - Mayor pro tempore; duties. 
The mayor pro tempore shall exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of the mayor during a vacancy in the office, absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, and until such vacancy has been regularly filled or until the return of the mayor or the removal of the disability. In the event of the absence or disability of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore for any cause, the chairman shall preside over meetings and shall discharge the duties of mayor until either the return of or removal of the disability of the mayor or mayor pro tempore. 
Section 2.7. - Quorum. 
The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, and four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time to compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 2.8. - Meetings; regular and special. 
The mayor and council shall fix a suitable time for its regular meetings and shall meet at least once each month for the transaction of business. If in the discretion of the mayor, or mayor pro tempore, it is deemed necessary to have an extra meeting, the mayor, or mayor pro tempore, may call the mayor and council together immediately for the purpose of a special meeting. The mayor and council may adjourn its meetings to some definite time in the interim of regular monthly meetings. 
Section 2.9. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Section 2.10. - City clerk, city treasurer; appointment, duties. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk and a city treasurer who shall take such oath as required by the mayor and council. The city clerk and city treasurer may be the same person. Five (5) affirmative votes of the mayor and council shall be required for the appointment of the city clerk and city treasurer. The city clerk and the city treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and may be removed at any time by a vote of five (5) members of the mayor and council adopting a resolution to that effect. Upon removal, the city clerk and/or city treasurer shall be paid forthwith any accrued salary to the date of removal, plus two (2) weeks' additional salary. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping minutes of the proceedings of the mayor and council, shall be the custodian of all records and documents pertaining to actions of the mayor and council, and shall exercise those powers and perform those duties required by law and by the mayor and council. The city clerk shall attest all formal contracts executed in behalf of the city. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall exercise those powers and duties required by law and by the mayor and council and shall provide requested information to and otherwise assist the city manager and the mayor and council. 
(d)  In the event of the absence or disability of the city clerk or city treasurer, or a vacancy in the office of either, the mayor and council shall appoint an acting city clerk or city treasurer to serve until the return of the city clerk or city treasurer or the removal of disability or until the vacancy in office shall have been regularly filled. An acting city clerk or city treasurer shall take the same oath, exercise all of the powers, and discharge all of the duties of the city clerk or city treasurer. 
Section 2.11. - City attorney, city judge; appointment, compensation, qualifications, duties. 
(a)  At its first regular meeting in January of each year, the mayor and council, by majority vote, shall appoint a city attorney and a city judge who shall take such oath as required by the mayor and council. The city attorney and city judge shall serve until the first meeting in January of the following year, and until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified, unless removed by a majority vote of the mayor and council prior thereto. 
(b)  The city attorney and city judge shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall determine. 
(c)  The city attorney and city judge shall be attorneys-at-law who have been licensed to engage in the practice of law in Georgia for a minimum of two (2) years at the time of appointment. No person may simultaneously hold the officers of city attorney and city judge. 
(d)  The city attorney shall be the legal advisor to the city and shall perform such duties as required by law and by the mayor and council. 
(e)  The city judge shall preside over the city court and shall perform such duties as required by law and by the mayor and council. 
Section 2.12. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any council member shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Section 2.13. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Mayor and Council of the City of Dublin hereby ordain …" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances as provided herein. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the mayor and council may designate. Proposed amendments to a proposed ordinance may be offered and voted on at the same meeting; provided, however, that any such proposed amendment is introduced in writing and pertains only to the subject matter of the proposed ordinance sought to be amended. 
Section 2.14. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, all acts of the mayor and council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Section 2.15. - Emergencies. 
On call of the mayor or mayor pro tempore or any two (2) council members, the mayor and council may convene and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty (30) days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the mayor and council shall be required for adoption. The mayor is specifically authorized to vote on emergency ordinances as provided in Section 2.4 of this Charter. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed forty-five (45) days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.16. - Votes required to adopt ordinances; effective date. 
A majority vote of the mayor and council shall be required to adopt any ordinance except an emergency ordinance. All ordinances, except emergency ordinances, adopted by the mayor and council shall become effective at 12:00 noon on the fifth day after adoption, unless a later effective date is provided in the ordinance, or unless vetoed by the mayor. 
Section 2.17. - Veto of ordinances. 
The mayor may veto any ordinance by filing written notice thereof and the reasons therefor, with the city clerk within four (4) calendar days after its adoption. An ordinance vetoed by the mayor shall not become effective unless adopted by an affirmative vote of five (5) council members at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council after the filing of the veto with the city clerk. An ordinance adopted after veto, as provided herein, shall become effective upon adoption. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTION, REMOVAL AND VACANCY IN OFFICE 

Section 3.1. - Mayor; election, voting. 
The entire electorate of the city shall be entitled to vote in elections for mayor. Such elections shall be conducted on a plurality vote basis with the candidate for mayor receiving the highest total number of votes cast being elected. 
Section 3.2. - Council members at large; election, voting. 
The entire electorate of the city shall be entitled to vote in elections for the three (3) council members at large. Such elections shall be conducted on a plurality vote basis with the three (3) candidates receiving the highest total number of votes cast being elected. There shall be no full slate requirement. Each registered voter shall be allowed to cast three (3) votes for three (3) different candidates; two (2) votes for two (2) different candidates; or one vote for one candidate. No voter shall be required to cast all three (3) votes. 
Section 3.3. - Ward, council members; designation, election, voting. 
(a)  The four (4) ward council members shall be elected from four (4) separate single member districts called wards and numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4. The boundaries of the wards shall be as follows: 
District 001—Laurens County 

 

 

 

 
District 002—Laurens County 

 

 

 
District 003—Laurens County 

 

 

 

 
District 004—Laurens County 

 

 

 

 

 
The boundaries of all four (4) wards shall at all times be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, "Official Map of the Council Wards of the City of Dublin, Georgia." Territory annexed to the city shall become a part of the ward it abuts. If any such annexed territory abuts more than one ward, the dividing line between the wards shall be extended along its present course to make the division. 
(b)  The new wards as set forth hereinabove shall become effective with the next regularly scheduled election for the City of Dublin, Georgia, or in the event of a vacancy, same shall become applicable at any special election held to fill said vacancy. 
(c)  Elections for the four (4) ward council members shall be conducted on a plurality vote basis with the candidate from each ward receiving the highest total number of votes cast being elected. 
(d)  Only voters residing in the ward on the date of the election may vote for a council member for that ward. 
(Ga. Laws 1981, p. 3979, Act No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 00-14, 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 01-04, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Section 3.4. - Time of elections. 
(a)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, beginning with the year 1993 and every four years thereafter, a general election shall be held for the offices of councilmembers at large. Those persons elected to such offices shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Their terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office at the first organizational meeting following their election, as provided in Section 2.5. 
(b)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, beginning with the year 1995 and every four years thereafter, a general election shall be held for the offices of mayor and councilmembers from Ward 1, Ward 2, Ward 3, and Ward 4. Those persons elected to such offices shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Their terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office at the first organizational meeting following their election, as provided in Section 2.5. 
(c)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, a general election shall be held for the members of the board of education from Education Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4. Those members of said board elected shall take office on the first day of January, 1994, and serve for initial terms of office which expire on December 31,1995, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(d)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, a general election shall be held for the members of the board of education from Education Super-district I, Education Super-district II, and at large. Those members of said board elected shall take office on the first day of January, 1994, and serve for initial terms of office which expire on December 31, 1997, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(e)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, beginning with the year 1995 and every four years thereafter, a general election shall be held for the members of the board of education from Education Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4. Those persons elected to such offices shall serve terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, beginning with the year 1997 and every four years thereafter, a general election shall be held for the members of the board of education from Education Super-district I, Education Super-district II, and at large. Those members elected to such offices shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, Act No. 856, § 2; Ga. Laws 1993, Act No. 197, § 1) 
Editor's note— All general municipal elections are mandated to be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51. 
Section 3.5. - Polling place or places. 
All elections for mayor and council members, and all other elections, shall be held at a polling place or at polling places designated by the mayor and council. 
Section 3.6. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, regular and special elections shall be conducted in accordance with provisions of the Act of the General Assembly entitled the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," approved April 4, 1968 (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 3.7. - Candidates to specify office sought. 
Every person who offers for election as mayor or council member of the city shall designate with the proper authority the specific office of mayor or council member for which he or she offers by designating the office of mayor, council member at large, or ward council member for a specific numbered ward. 
Section 3.8. - Special elections. 
The mayor and council shall have power to call special elections as provided by law. All special elections shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Section 3.9. - Occurrence of vacancies. 
A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member occurs when a duly elected person fails to qualify, or when a person who has been duly elected and qualified either dies, resigns, is removed, or no longer meets the qualifications of office. 
Section 3.10. - Filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Any vacancy occurring in the office of mayor or council member within the last one hundred eighty (180) days of any term of office shall be filled by a vote of a majority of the remaining members of the mayor and council appointing a person to serve out the unexpired term of office and until a successor is regularly elected at the next general election for electing municipal officers and until that successor is qualified. 
(b)  Any vacancy occurring in the office of mayor or council members other than as provided in subsection (a) shall be filled by a special election called by the mayor and council within ten (10) days after said vacancy occurs. Such special election shall be conducted at the time of the next general election for electing municipal officers if such general election occurs not less than forty-five (45) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days after such vacancy occurs. Otherwise, such special election shall be conducted not less than thirty (30) and not more than forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the call. If the special election is not to be held within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled by a vote of a majority of the remaining members of the mayor and council appointing a person to serve until a successor is elected at the special election provided in this subsection and until that successor is qualified. 
(c)  A person appointed by the mayor and council to fill a vacancy shall take the oath of office and commence serving at the meeting at which such appointment is made or as soon thereafter as practical. A successor elected to fill a vacancy at the special election provided in this section shall take the oath of office and commence serving at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council following certification of the results of the special election or as soon thereafter as practical and shall serve out the unexpired term of office and until the election and qualification of a successor. 
(Ga. Laws 1981, p. 3979, Act No. 352, § 2) 
Section 3.11. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the mayor and council, by ordinance, may prescribe such rules and regulations, including qualifying fees, as deemed appropriate to exercise any options or perform any duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sections 3.12—3.20. - Reserved. 
Section 3.21. - Removal of elected officials. 
(a)  The mayor or a council member may be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
(b)  Removal of the mayor or a council member shall be accomplished, after an investigative hearing, by a vote of five (5) of the remaining members of mayor and council with the mayor specifically authorized to vote in proceedings for the removal of a council member as provided in Section 2.4 of this Charter. In the event the mayor or a council member is sought to be removed, the person so sought to be removed shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds therefor and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any person removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal to the Superior Court of Laurens County, Georgia, in accordance with the provisions governing appeals to the Superior Court from the Probate Court. 
ARTICLE IV. - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.1. - City departments and agencies. 
Except as provided by this Charter, the departments and agencies of the city shall be created and established by ordinance, and the departments shall be responsible for the performance of the functions and services enumerated therein and as prescribed by administrative regulations of the city manager consistent therewith. 
Section 4.2. - Administrative reorganization. 
The mayor and council may by ordinance organize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue such departments, agencies, or divisions of the city government as it may from time to time deem desirable. 
Sections 4.3—4.10. - Reserved. 
Section 4.11. - City manager; appointment, qualifications, term, compensation. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the administrative head of the city government, and shall be responsible for the administration of all departments. Five (5) affirmative votes of the mayor and council shall be required for the appointment of the city manager. The city manager shall be appointed with regard to merit only and need not be a resident of the city when appointed. The city manager shall hold office during the pleasure of the mayor and council, and shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall determine. The city manager may reside outside the city while in office only with the approval of the mayor and council. 
Section 4.12. - City manager; duties and responsibilities. 
The city manager shall: 
(1)  See that the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  Prepare the agenda and attend meetings of the mayor and council and recommend for adoption any measure deemed expedient; 
(3)  Make reports to the mayor and council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and keep the mayor and council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future financial needs; 
(4)  Appoint and suspend or remove all city employees, except those persons appointed by the mayor and council under the provisions of this Charter in accordance with such general personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the mayor and council may adopt; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the mayor and council; 
(6)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, properties, and operations of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law; 
(7)  Investigate the affairs, records, accounts and expenditures of the various commissions and boards created by the City of Dublin, and report thereon at least once a year to the mayor and council; 
(8)  Have the right to request the counsel, ad vice or opinion of the city attorney concerning any matter affecting the interest of the city; and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to respond to such request to the best of his ability; 
(9)  Act in a liaison capacity on behalf of the mayor and council with boards, offices, agencies and commissions of the city; 
(10)  Exercise any other powers and perform any other duties required or authorized by the mayor and council and not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Section 4.13. - Mayor and council not to interfere with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the mayor and council shall deal with city employees who are subject to appointment and removal by the city manager solely through the city manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
Section 4.14. - City manager; suspension and removal. 
The mayor and council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedure: 
(a)  Five (5) affirmative votes of the mayor and council shall be required to adopt a preliminary resolution setting forth reasons for the removal of the city manager. 
(b)  The resolution may also provide for the suspension of the city manager for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
(c)  A certified copy of the resolution shall promptly be served on the city manager. 
(d)  A public hearing shall be held if a written request therefor is filed by the city manager with the city clerk not later than five (5) days after service upon him of a certified copy of the preliminary resolution. 
(e)  The public hearing, if requested, shall be held at a regularly scheduled council meeting not less than fifteen (15) nor later than thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city clerk a response to the preliminary removal resolution not later than three (3) days prior to the public hearing. 
(f)  Five (5) affirmative votes of the mayor and council shall be required to adopt a final resolution of removal which may be made effective immediately. Such a final resolution of removal may be made at any time after five (5) days from the date when a certified copy of the preliminary resolution was served on the city manager if no public hearing has been requested in writing, or at any time after the public hearing if a request therefor has been properly and timely filed. 
(g)  The city manager shall be entitled to receive his salary up until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(h)  The action of the mayor and council in suspending or removing a city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency except for the determination of constitutional questions. 
Section 4.15. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  In the event of the absence or disability of the city manager or a vacancy in the office, the mayor and council shall appoint an acting city manager to serve until the return of the city manager or the removal of disability or until the vacancy in office shall have been regularly filled. 
(b)  An acting city manager shall take the same oath, exercise all of the powers, and discharge all of the duties of the city manager. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY COURT 

Section 5.1. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the City Court of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
Section 5.2. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The city court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The city court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or ten (10) days in jail, or both. 
(c)  The city court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for twelve (12) months, or both, or to sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
(d)  The city court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The city court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trail, the bond shall be forfeited by the city judge, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least three (3) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trail and such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trail, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The city court shall have the authority to bind persons over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The city court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The city court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposition of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas and warrants which may be served by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by general state law. 
(i)  The city court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Act No. 174, § 1) 
Section 5.3. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Laurens County from the city court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Section 5.4. - Appointment of judge pro hac vice. 
Whenever the city judge is disqualified to act in any case or because of sickness, absence, or any other reason is unable to act in any case, the city judge may appoint a judge pro hac vice to preside and exercise all of the functions of city judge in that case. If the city judge is unable to appoint a judge pro hac vice, or during a vacancy in the office of city judge, the mayor and council may appoint a judge pro hac vice by resolution. Any person appointed as judge pro hac vice shall be an attorney at law who has been licensed to engage in the practice of law in Georgia for a minimum of two (2) years at the time of the appointment. The order or resolution appointing a judge pro hac vice shall provide for compensation which shall not exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(Act No. 174, § 2) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Section 6.1. - Property tax. 
The mayor and council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the mayor and council in its discretion. 
Section 6.2. - Millage rate, due dates, payment methods. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.3. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The mayor and council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.9. 
Section 6.4. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The mayor and council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.9. The mayor and city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Section 6.5. - Franchises. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The mayor and council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of thirty-five (35) years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The mayor and city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book. The mayor and city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.6. - Service charges. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have the right, power, and authority, by ordinance, to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the city and to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of the city. If unpaid, the sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable as provided in Section 6.9. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services, including the power to fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary charge, tax or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or services provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. The sanitary taxes and the assessments thereto shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which the taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable as provided in Section 6.9. 
Section 6.7. - Special assessments. 
The mayor and council shall have the power, by ordinance, to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.9. 
Section 6.8. - Construction; other taxes. 
The mayor and council shall be empowered to levy and other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.9. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The mayor and council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.1 through 6.8 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fa., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer or tax executions. 
Section 6.10. - General obligations bonds. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the mayor and council as provided by an act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 71), as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided. 
Section 6.12. - Short-term notes. 
Pursuant to applicable state law, the city may obtain temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year. 
Section 6.13. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be as fixed by ordinance of the mayor and council. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting, planning and reporting of each department, office, agency, or activity of the city. 
Section 6.14. - Budget preparation and adoption. 
The mayor and council shall provide by ordinance for the adoption of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program and a capital budget which shall apply to all departments and agencies of the city. The ordinance shall prescribe the procedures and requirements for the preparation, adoption, and execution of the annual operating and capital budgets; provided, however, such budgets shall be prepared and submitted by the city manager to the mayor and council for its consideration prior to the commencement of the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sections 6.15—6.20. - Reserved. 
Section 6.21. - External audit. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall provide annually for an independent audit of the accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the government of the city and of its every office, department, board, authority, commission, or other agency. The audit shall be made by an accountant or an accounting firm, the members of which have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city or of any of its departments, offices, boards, commissions or agencies. The designated accountant shall be a certified public accountant, or, if an accounting firm is employed, the members thereof shall be so certified and thoroughly qualified by training and experience in governmental accounting to perform the audit. 
(b)  The audit may be conducted on a quarterly or continuing basis and the final report of the annual audit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, and in no event later than six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year. The audit report shall be available to the public. 
(c)  The mayor and council may at any time order an examination or special audit of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the city. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Section 7.1. - Authority to create. 
Except as prescribed by general law or special act of the General Assembly, the mayor and council shall have authority to create commissions, councils or boards which shall perform duties prescribed by the mayor and council, including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings, and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for such other purposes authorized by the mayor and council. 
Section 7.2. - Composition; appointment, bylaws. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor and council shall have the authority to provide for the manner of appointment, make-up and composition of such commissions, council, or boards, and their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. The mayor and council shall have the authority to annually appropriate and donate money derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise for and to such commissions, councils, and boards to provide for their operation, either in whole or in part. 
(b)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(c)  Any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(d)  Each board and commission may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the mayor and council, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8.1. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The mayor and council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law as now or later amended (Ga. Laws 1976, p. 350). 
(b)  The mayor and council may quit-claim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the mayor and council may authorize the mayor and city clerk to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
Section 8.2. - Eminent domain. 
The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be taken under Chapter 36-202 of the Georgia Code, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other Georgia law applicable now or provided in the future. 
Section 8.3. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Section 8.4. - Participation in elections. 
No appointed officer or employee of the city shall in any manner contribute to, participate in, or take part in any election, primary or any political contests, other than by exercising his right to vote; provided, the foregoing prohibitions shall apply only to those elections, primaries or political contests for offices of the city. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be punishable as for violation of a city ordinance. 
Section 8.5. - Ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the city and existing rules and regulations of the city and its agencies not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall be effective ordinances and resolutions of the city or of its agencies until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Section 8.6. - Contracts and obligations; proceedings. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof, as obligations and rights of the city. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal), judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective date of this Charter by or against the city or its departments and agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this Charter. 
(c)  The existing departmental organization of the city shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this Charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as provided by ordinance of the mayor and council and administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Section 8.7. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this Charter, for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 8.8. - Section captions. 
The captions of the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
Section 8.9. - Severability. 
If any provisions of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table contains amendments, either in the text or in the notes following the text, to the Charter of the City of Dublin, Georgia, H.B. 1578, Act No. 968, of the 1978 Session of the General Assembly. 

 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How designated, cited. 
The chapters, articles, divisions and sections embraced in this Code of Ordinances shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, Georgia" and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Dublin City Code." 
(Code 1964, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction, definitions. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of this city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen would be repugnant to the context of the provisions or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Generally: All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
City: The city of Dublin in the county of Laurens in the state of Georgia. 
Code: This Code of Ordinances as designated and cited in section 1-1 above. 
County: The county of Laurens in the state of Georgia. 
Delegation of authority: Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize such officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designates otherwise. 
Easement: A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another. A right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner. 
Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
In the city: The words "in the city" or "in this city" mean and include any territory within the corporate limits of this city and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special act, except as otherwise specified. 
Joint authority: Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise specifically declared. 
Law: Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United States, the state, the county, the city or any agency thereof, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate. 
Mayor and board of aldermen: The governing body of the city. This body shall also be known as the mayor and city council. 
Month: The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number: Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard: Whenever certain hours are named in this Code they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the city. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc.: Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city by title only, i.e., "mayor," "clerk," "manager," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city. 
Or, and: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the context of the provision requires it. 
Owner: The word "owner" shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person: The word "person" shall include and be applied to a firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization, club, society, group acting as a unit, or body politic and corporate, as well as to an individual. 
Personal property: The words "personal property" shall include money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things in action, and any other species of property, except real property. 
Preceding, following: The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean the next before and the next after, respectively. 
Property: The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
Public place: Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the public has access. 
Public way: Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
Real property: The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time: In all cases where any section of this Code or city ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
Residence: The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed to be his residence. 
Roadway: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall, may: The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is discretionary. 
Sidewalk: The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription: The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, when his name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. 
State: The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the state of Georgia. 
Street: The word "street" shall mean and include public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto and other public thoroughfares in the city devoted to public use. 
Tenant, occupant: The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense: Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past or present. 
Writing, written: The words "writing" and "written" shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year: The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (Code 1964, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 102-102—102-104. 
Sec. 1-3. - When section 1-2 does not apply. 
The rules of construction and definitions set forth in section 1-2 shall not be applied to any section of this Code or city ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or definition, or when the subject matter or context of such provisions or ordinances may be repugnant thereto. 
Sec. 1-4. - Incorporation by reference. 
All standard codes, rules, regulations, and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 1-5. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections in this Code is for information only and is not a part of this Code. Citations to the 1964 Code of the city (Code 1964) and to later ordinances indicate only the source of such section and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in bold-face type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-7. - Reference to Code, conflicts. 
In addition to the rules of construction and definitions specified in this chapter, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
(a)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(c)  If conflicting provisions be found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter. 
Sec. 1-8. - Police power extended to city property. 
The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city and the general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on such property. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby; provided, that supplementation of this Code by authorized persons shall be permitted. 
(Code 1964, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinances of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision or the failure to perform any such act shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed twelve (12) months, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Whenever a bad check is issued to the city, it shall constitute an unlawful act and shall be subject to a penalty of the maximum amount allowable according to O.C.G.A. Section 16-9-20, in addition to the full amount of the check. 
(Code 1964, § 1-8; Ord. No. 88-8, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 91-8, 3-7-91; Ord. No. 00-8, 3-16-2000) 
Sec. 1-11. - Punishment of corporations. 
In all cases where any corporation in this city shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code or ordinance of the city, the city judge shall issue a summons to said corporation, stating the offense and directing it to appear by its agent or attorney at the time and place for trial. This summons shall be served upon an officer or agent of said corporation. After hearing the case if it appears that the corporation, through its officers or otherwise, has failed to comply with the provision of this Code or ordinance in question, the city judge shall find the defendant guilty and impose a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), unless otherwise provided. Said fine with all costs shall be enforced and collected by execution against the property of the corporation. This section shall not relieve any officer or agent of such corporation from prosecution and punishment in case such officer or agent has violated or fails to comply with any provision of this Code or any ordinance. 
(1937 Code, § 79; Code 1964, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-12. - Penalty not exclusive. 
The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
In the event any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-14. - Effect of repeals. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of such repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1964, § 1-4) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical board, § 6-113; plumbing board, § 6-123; heating and air conditioning board, § 6-133; gas fitters examining board, § 6-151; court, Ch. 8; elections, Ch. 9; recreation board, § 15-16 et seq.; planning commission, § 17-16 et seq.; board of education, § 19-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, Ga. Code Ann., Tit. 69. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Obstructing, abusing, failing to obey officials. 
No person shall in any manner oppose or obstruct by acts or menace any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his duties, or strike, assault, molest or abuse said officer or employee, and no person shall refuse and fail to obey an order or instruction of such officer or employee. 
(Code 1964, § 22-13) 
Sec. 2-2. - Impersonating officers. 
No person shall falsely impersonate or represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 22-14) 
Sec. 2-3. - Engineering standards and specifications adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing engineering standards and specifications for the City of Dublin, Georgia, the "Standards and Specifications for City of Dublin, First Edition, 1981," of which not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-13, 6-18-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-13, adopted June 18, 1981, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included as § 2-3 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Building and construction, ch. 6; planning and zoning, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 24; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
Secs. 2-4—2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and council generally, § 2.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Governing body, Ga. Code Ann., ch. 69-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Compensation. 
The salaries of the mayor and city council shall be as follows: 
Mayor, nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per month. 
Council members, seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 73-26, 12-27-73; Ord. No. 91-7, 3-7-91; Ord. No. 01-01, 3-8-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, 4-5-2007) 
Sec. 2-17. - Chairman. 
The mayor and the city council shall elect a chairman, who shall preside over the meetings of the mayor and the city council during the absence or disability of the mayor and the mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1964, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-18. - Regular, special meetings; duty to attend. 
The regular meetings of the mayor and city council will be held on the first and third Thursdays of each month at a time which shall be set by resolution of the city council. The mayor, or in his absence or sickness, the mayor pro tem, may call, cancel or reschedule a meeting at any time upon giving notice to each member of the council not absent from the city. It shall be the duty of the mayor and each member of the council to attend all meetings. 
(Code 1964, § 2-29; Ord. No. 80-5, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 06-11, § I, 8-17-2006; Ord. No. 13-09, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 2-19. - Roll call at meetings required. 
The names of the mayor and council present shall be entered on the minutes of each meeting. 
(Code 1964, § 2-30; Ord. No. 06-11, § II, 8-17-2006) 
Sec. 2-20. - Robert's Rules of Order to govern meetings. 
All meetings of the mayor and the city council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order unless otherwise provided by the City's Charter, this Code, ordinances or rules of the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-41) 
Secs. 2-21—2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-31. - Appointment. 
The mayor shall appoint standing and special committees as the same are needed and designate their chairmen. 
(Code 1964, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-32. - Aldermen to serve on committees, perform duties. 
It shall be the duty of each councilman to faithfully discharge his duties as chairman or member of any standing or special committees he may be appointed to, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the laws of the state or the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-33. - Duties; reports. 
Standing and special committees shall perform the duties assigned to them by the mayor and the city council and shall make reports whenever requested by the mayor and the city council. Whenever any special matter is referred to any committee it shall make a report thereon at the next meeting of the mayor and the city council unless further time is granted. 
(Code 1964, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-34. - Penalty for failure to report. 
Should any committee fail to make required reports the mayor shall have the right to appoint another committee. 
(Code 1964, § 2-35) 
Secs. 2-35—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to pass ordinances, procedure, § 2.13 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Effect of repeal. 
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Secs. 2-47—2-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS TO CODE 

Sec. 2-60. - Effect. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-61. - Manner. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-62. - Language. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:_______(Set out new provisions in full)_______." 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-63. - New material. 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered_______, which reads as follows:_______(Set out new provisions in full)_______." 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) hereof, when the mayor and city council desire to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the mayor and city council desire to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the mayor and city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-64. - Repeal. 
All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-65. - Subject to general penalty. 
In case of the amendment by the mayor and city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-10 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 2-66. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and board of aldermen or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
Secs. 2-67—2-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and council, § 2.1 et seq.; city manager, § 4.11 et seq. 
Cross reference— Building inspector, § 6-26 et seq.; fire department, § 10-19 et seq. 

Sec. 2-78. - Retirement plan. 
Nothing contained in this Code of Ordinances or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal or otherwise affect the validity of the retirement plan for the employees of the city or amendments thereto, and the same is hereby continued in effect. 
Sec. 2-79. - Insurance benefits offered by JMEBS. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40, the City of Dublin hereby subscribes to a plan of employee benefits consisting of group health, life and accidental death insurance benefits offered through the joint municipal employees benefit system. Said benefits shall be provided under Policy Number GH 19088-8 (Health) and Policy Number 17910-8 (Life, AD&D and dental) or its successor (or successors) issued by the Northwestern National Life Insurance Company (or its successor) to the joint municipal employees benefit system. Benefits to be provided under the City of Dublin's plan are summarized in the health insurance benefit booklets which are enclosed with this section. The Alternate Plan A health booklet, High Option Dental and the Life Insurance booklet are enclosed with this section. [See editor's note following this section.] 
(b)  The City of Dublin agrees to remit to JMEBS the monthly contributions necessary to keep in force the coverages provided. Such contributions shall be due and payable on the first day of each month; and late fees or charges, as established by the JMEBS Board of Trustees, shall be collected on any contributions not received by the fifteenth day of each month. The city agrees to provide thirty (30) days' advance written notice to JMEBS of its intent not to continue participation in the employee benefit program. 
(c)  The plan year for the provisions of employee benefits offered by the City of Dublin to its employees shall begin on the first day of December, 1987, with the next renewal plan year beginning on the first day of January, 1989. The renewal date in succeeding years is to be established by JMEBS in accordance with its operating rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-31, §§ 1—3, 12-10-87) 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 87-31, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 10, 1987, has been included herein as § 2-79 at the editor's discretion. The Health Insurance benefit, the Alternate Plan A health, High Option Dental and Life Insurance booklets are not included herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-80—2-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to borrow money, issue bonds or notes, § 1.4(5); to appropriate money, § 1.4(4); finance and fiscal, § 6.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Licenses, ch. 12; taxation, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal bonds and other debts, Ga. Code Ann., § 87-2 et seq. 

Sec. 2-93. - Fiscal year established. 
The fiscal year of the city is hereby established as July 1 to June 13th of each calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-94. - Approval and payment of disbursements. 
(a)  Disbursements not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) may be made with the approval of the city manager or mayor and city council. 
(b)  Disbursements exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) must be approved by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  All checks drawn by the city shall be signed by the city clerk and countersigned by the city manager or mayor. 
(Code 1964, § 2-56; Ord. No. 86-28, 11-20-86) 
Sec. 2-95. - Clerk and treasurer to keep accurate records. 
The city clerk and the city treasurer shall keep accurate and complete records of all receipts, disbursements and other handling of city funds. 
(Code 1964, § 2-57) 
Sec. 2-96. - Registration of bonds. 
The clerk shall keep a book in which shall be registered the bonds of the city in accordance with the requirements of the bond ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 2-58) 
Sec. 2-97. - Preparation of payrolls. 
Department heads shall submit payroll accounts for the persons employed in their departments and shall certify that the amounts shown are due and payable to the listed employees. If an employee is to be paid for any time he has not actually worked, the department head must submit evidence of annual or sick leave or other duly authorized leave. 
(Code 1964, § 2-59) 
Secs. 2-98, 2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICIALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, Dec. 2, 2010, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 2-100—2-103, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 00-10, adopted Mar. 16, 2000. 

Sec. 2-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-101. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. This does not include ordinary city employees, but does also include all individuals (including city employees) appointed by the mayor or city council to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous twelve (12) months either equal or exceed: (a) five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or services; or (b) ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-103. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall directly or indirectly enter into or have any interest in any contract with the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law, including the Charter of the City of Dublin. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city, nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Dublin, nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Dublin on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-104. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-105. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three (3) residents of the City, one (1) appointed by the mayor, one (1) appointed by the city council, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  The initial appointment terms shall be one (1) year for the member appointed by the mayor, two (2) years for the member appointed by council, and three (3) years for the jointly appointed member. Thereafter, all members of the board of ethics shall serve a three-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten (10) years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Dublin. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-106. - Filing and service of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The clerk shall retain the original and within five (5) business days serve copies of the complaint on: 
(1)  The chairman of the board of ethics; and 
(2)  The city official or officials charged in the complaint. 
(c)  Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  All complaints shall be submitted in writing and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. The board of ethics may require that complaints illegibly or informally drawn be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as they prescribe. 
(e)  All complaints shall state by section number and subsection letter the specific sections and subsections of this code of ethics for city officials which are alleged to have been violated. 
(f)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council, and if so finding, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing the complaint. 
(g)  For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(h)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint, and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. All other complaints shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(i)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(j)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-107. - Board procedure. 
(a)  A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days after filing of the complaint. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one (1) hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. 
(c)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. 
(d)  The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven (7) calendar days after completion of the final hearing. 
(e)  Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this article shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-108. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Laurens County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-109. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; 
(2)  A fine greater that one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(3)  Requested for resignation by the city council; or 
(4)  Removal from office pursuant to section 3.21. Removal of elected officials, of the Charter of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 12-2-2010) 
Secs. 2-110—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-121. - Adoption of National Incident Management System. 
The City of Dublin hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the city train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. No. 05-18, 11-10-2005) 
Secs. 2-122—2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL COURT PROSECUTOR 

Sec. 2-200. - Findings and intent. 
Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass the ordinance or resolution codified herein, and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. § 15-18-5, and to enact this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-201. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Dublin, Georgia in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city, state offenses enforceable in the municipal court, and all other matters as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-202. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-203. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
 "I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Dublin, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-204. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-205. - Jurisdiction, duties and authority. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Dublin, Georgia shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-206. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one (1) or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. The prosecuting attorney may, when absent from court, appoint a substitute prosecutor, who shall serve for the limited time of his appointment. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-207. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and his council. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Secs. 2-208—2-230. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING AND SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-16, §§ 1, 3A, adopted Sept. 18, 2008, repealed Ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-23, pertained to advertising and derived from Ord. No. 82-17, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 25, 1982; and Ord. No. 91-16, adopted Nov. 7, 1991. 
Cross reference— Advertising in cemeteries, § 7-12; distribution of handbills and advertising matter, § 11-58; licenses, Ch. 12; going-out-of-business sales, § 14-7; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3-31. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  Dublin, Laurens County, Georgia is a rapidly developing community. As our population here and in surrounding counties increases, many new services and businesses are locating in the city. It is important for our citizens and businesses to be able to communicate through the use of signs. This important individual right of speech must be protected and balanced against the rights of the general public. In adopting these sign regulations, it is not the intent and purpose of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Dublin to impose an outright ban on signs, or regulate their content, but instead to: 
(1)  Ensure the right of individuals to convey their messages through signs; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(3)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive land use planning; 
(4)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(5)  Maintain the historical and cultural heritage and image of the city; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(8)  Promote economic development and tourism; 
(9)  Protect private property values; 
(10)  Promote proper sign maintenance to insure safety and appearance; 
(11)  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs; and 
(12)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(b)  In assessing how to go about the above-described task, the mayor and city council have gathered information from many sources. They have received input from city staff, including the departments of engineering, planning and zoning, legal and police. Mayor and council have given considerable weight to and find the following relevant and useful as to the size, location and quantity of sign structures within the city and how to regulate them in order to achieve the above-stated intents and purposes: University of Georgia Land Use Clinic (2003, June 26); Sign Control on Rural Corridors: Model Provisions and Guidance; Wisconsin Department of Transportation (1994, December); Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study: Impacts of an Advertising Variable Message Sign on Freeway Traffic; Scenic America (2007); Billboards in the Digital Age: Unsafe (and Unsightly) at Any Speed; Scenic America Issue Alert; Nasar, Jack L. and Hong, Xiaodong (1999, September); Visual Preferences in Urban Signscapes; Journal of Environment and Behavior, 31(5), 671-691; Office of Safety Research and Development, Federal Highway Administration (2001, September 11); Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction, U.S. Department of Transportation; New York State Department of State, Division of Local Government Services (2006, January); Municipal Control of Signs; James A. Coon Local Government Technical Series; Weinstein, Alan C., A Study of Local Regulation of Outdoor Advertising in 268 U.S. Jurisdictions; Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Inc.; City Club of Portland (1996, September 6), Billboard Regulation in Portland; City Club of Portland Bulletin, 78(13), 1-40; Smily, Alison and Persaud, Bhagwant, et al (2005); Traffic Safety Evaluations of Video Advertising Signs; Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1937, 105-112. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-32. - General provisions. 
(a)  No sign structure shall be placed or maintained within the city except in conformity with this article. Violations of this article shall be punished as a misdemeanor. The city reserves the right to take legal action to remove signs erected in violation of this article, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this article, any sign, display or device allowed under this article may contain any commercial or noncommercial message or any political or nonpolitical message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 106-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
(c)  Except as provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered by the city inspection department. Whenever this article places a duty, obligation, power or authority in the building superintendant, it shall be construed to include that official's authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-33. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words have the following meanings. The general definitions and interpretative rules of the zoning ordinance shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions shall control: 
Billboard: A type of ground sign which is permitted in certain zoning districts as provided by this article, and which shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height and three hundred eighty-two (382) square feet in sign face area, and which is greater than three hundred (300) square feet in sign face area. Billboards may be double-faced, and may include embellishments not exceeding an additional one hundred (100) square feet. 
Ground sign: A sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames or other mounting structures other than buildings. 
Hanging sign: Any nonfabric sign hanging or suspended from the exterior walls of a building structure, or an awning attached to the building structure, which is directed so as to be plainly visible from a public right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, such hanging signs shall be regulated as wall signs and shall only be permissible in zoning districts where wall signs are permissible, and shall be included in and count towards the amount of wall signage allowed under this article. 
Inflatable sign: Any sign that is or can be filled with three (3) cubic feet or more of air or gas. 
Multiple-message sign: Any sign, which changes the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slates, or by changing electronic display on the sign face. 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign, which does not conform, to the provisions of this article that was legal when it was erected. 
Portable sign: Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one (1) place to another even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. In addition, the following shall be deemed a "portable sign": 
(1)  An umbrella used for advertising. 
(2)  A sign mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of acting as a sign exposed to the public and is not in use in the ordinary course of carrying out its transportation function. 
(3)  Inflatable signs. 
(4)  Pennants, streamers and wind-blown or air-blown devices. 
(5)  Any flag for which there is no symbol, emblem, text, number or copy whatsoever on the flag (e.g., colored flags with no message). 
Project entrance sign: A sign located at a discernible entrance into a property consisting of more than one (1) subdivided lot or developed with more than one (1) principal building (e.g., a residential subdivision, multifamily development, or office or industrial park). 
Sign: Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign face: The actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Sign structure: This includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign. 
Small signs: Signs which have less than one (1) square foot in area, and which are either wall or window signs, or which are ground signs less than three (3) feet in height, are classified as small signs, and are not regulated by this article, provided that when two (2) or more such small signs are used together to form a single message, then such group of small signs shall be treated as one (1) sign for purposes of this article, and will be regulated accordingly. 
Wall sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall and extending from the surface of the exterior no more than twenty-four (24) inches. 
Window sign: A sign mounted inside of a structure and designed to be seen from outside of the structure through a window. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-34. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including, but not limited to; public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques and historical markers shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Small signs, as defined herein, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Street address identifiers and building identification numbers on multitenant buildings, which are essential to the location of such buildings. 
(d)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of thirty (30) days. 
(e)  Signs located next to drive-through lanes, not exceeding six (6) feet in height or thirty-six (36) square feet in area. 
(f)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs (including direction of travel, speed limits, etc.) along private streets and driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of the City of Dublin and which do not exceed four (4) square feet each. 
(g)  Signs erected more than two (2) feet inside a building. 
(h)  Building markers (any sign cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material) and integral decorative or architectural features. 
(i)  Handicapped parking signs, when required per local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-35. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in every zoning district: 
(1)  Roof signs (which means signs mounted above a roof or projecting above the roofline of a structure or painted on the roof). 
(2)  Rotating signs, except for barber poles attached to barber shops. 
(3)  Moving signs or signs with moving parts. This includes, but is not limited to, animated signs involving motion or sound; signs with moving words; signs with waiving elements, whether motorized or wind-powered; or similar moving signs. "Moving signs" does not include multiple-message signs as defined herein. 
(4)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly-owned or maintained signs. 
(5)  Signs which contain words, pictures or statements, which are obscene, as defined by the O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(6)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign. 
(7)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any, sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
(8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(9)  Any sign that interferes with utilities such as water mains and hydrants, sanitary sewerage, gas, electricity, and communications equipment or lines, or that interferes with natural or manmade stormwater drainage facilities. 
(10)  Portable signs as defined herein, shall be prohibited in any zoning classification after January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-36. - General regulations. 
(a)  Location and setback. 
(1)  The property owner must give permission for all sign structures erected on the owner's property. Signs or sign structures are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  All sign structures must comply with all side and rear setbacks of the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  All signs, or any portion thereof, must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way of any public road, unless the minimum building setback in the zone where the sign is located is less than ten (10) feet, in which case the sign shall conform to the structure setbacks for that zoning district. 
(4)  No portion of a sign or sign structure erected on private property shall encroach on, or overhang the public right-of-way or any other person's property. 
(5)  Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that is the base, sign face or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. 
(b)  Illumination. Signs cannot be illuminated in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning districts. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. Except as expressly provided in this article, no sign may use images or display pictures changing more frequently than once per minute. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
(2)  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
(3)  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low-wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(4)  No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties. No sign shall exceed one-half (0.5) footcandles at any adjacent property line in a residential district and two (2) footcandles at any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Multiple-message signs. 
(1)  Multiple-message signs are permitted only in the B-2, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, except for multiple-message billboards, which may only be located in the M-1 or M-2 zoning districts. 
(2)  No multiple-message sign may change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every six (6) seconds. 
(3)  When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three (3) seconds or less. When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed in an electronic manner, through the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting or other light source, the transition shall occur within two (2) seconds. 
(4)  Except as expressly provided in this article in regards to billboards, the portion of the sign face of a multiple-message sign which accommodates multiple-messages shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total sign face area and may not change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every six (6) seconds; the remaining portion shall be static. 
(5)  When any multiple-message sign is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential district, the display of multiple-messages shall discontinue between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and the sign shall be static and not display more than one (1) message during that period. 
(6)  Multiple-message signs which are illuminated or which use electronic lighting to display message shall be subject to the restrictions and limitation applicable to illumination in this article. 
(7)  There shall be located no more than one (1) multiple-message sign per lot, and such sign shall be permitted only on a ground sign or freestanding structure, and not on any wall sign or window sign. 
(8)  Multiple-message billboards constructed after the adoption of this article shall be located at least five thousand (5,000) feet from existing billboards using a multiple-message sign face, measured from the base of the billboard along the street frontage to the base of the nearest existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face on the same side of the street, and three thousand (3,000) feet from any existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face, measured along the shortest straight line from sign structure to sign structure. 
(9)  No multiple-message sign shall be permitted in any historic district of the city. 
(10)  The total number of multiple-message signs (including multiple-message billboards) within the City of Dublin shall be limited to fifty (50) signs. 
(d)  Flags. For the purposes of this article, flags are fabric signs displayed by being attached to a flagpole. Flags are permitted in all zoning districts without a permit, subject to the following size limitations: 
(1)  Only one (1) flagpole is permitted per lot in a residential zone; 
(2)  Flagpoles in residential zoned districts shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less; 
(3)  The longest side of the flag shall not be greater than one-fourth (¼) the height of the flagpole to which the flag is mounted; 
(4)  With the exception of the official national flag of the United States of America, the size of which shall be governed by federal law, no flag shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. 
(e)  Banners. For the purposes of this article, banners are paper, plastic or fabric signs, which are not attached to any rigid frame. Banners are only permitted in B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning classifications, and only when mounted or attached to a building. Banners may only be exhibited for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days out of any ninety-day period. 
(f)  Portable signs. Portable signs are only permitted in the B-2 B-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning classifications. Portable signs where permitted may only be displayed for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days in any ninety-day period. Further, the display of portable signs as defined herein, shall be prohibited in any zoning classification after January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008; Ord. No. 14-08, § 1, 9-4-2014; Ord. No. 18-05, 6-21-2018) 
Sec. 3-37. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
(a)  If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to signs located on any lot or development, except that any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public is not restricted or regulated by this article. 
(1)  Sign height. Sign height is measured from center line of street grade upon which the sign fronts to the highest portion of the sign structure. 
(2)  Sign face area. The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle, which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. See examples below. However, this example is not a substantive regulation as to permissible types of signs: 

(b)  Signs permitted in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning districts. 
(1)  Ground signs: Three (3) double-faced signs per lot. No single sign face may exceed six (6) square feet. Height is limited to six (6) feet. 
(2)  Window signs: Permitted, but total window signage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)  Wall signs: Not permitted. 
(4)  Project entrance sign: 
a.  On state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet each, total height limited to (6) feet. 
b.  On roads other than state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet each, total height limited to four (4) feet. 
(c)  Signs permitted in the P, P-1 and H-1 zoning districts. 
(1)  Ground signs: One (1) double-faced sign per lot. No single sign face may exceed thirty-five (35) square feet. Height is limited to five (5) feet. On lots with three (3) or more tenants, each tenant may have an additional double-faced sign, located on the ground sign, not to exceed seven (7) square feet per face, and the sign structure may be up to, but not exceed, ten (10) feet in height. 
(2)  Window signs: Permitted, but total window signage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)  Wall signs: One (1) sign per street frontage is permitted. Maximum square footage for the wall sign shall be ten (10) square feet. 
(4)  Project entrance sign: 
a.  On state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet each, total height limited to six (6) feet. 
b.  On roads other than state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet each, total height limited to four (4) feet. 
(5)  In the P-l district (public district) where the contiguous site contains more than thirty (30) acres and has a minimum of five hundred (500) feet of continuous road frontage, there shall be permitted one (1) double-faced ground sign per lot. No single sign face may exceed two hundred (200) square feet. The maximum height for each sign structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Fixed, nonchanging signs directing the public to the availability of emergency services (such as a hospital emergency room entrance) shall be of such size, shape and number as is determined to be necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public upon presentation of a plan to the building superintendent and may exceed limits otherwise imposed by this provision. 
(d)  Signs permitted in the, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
(1)  Ground signs: One (1) double-faced sign per street frontage is permitted. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be two (2) square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the public right-of-way, or one (1) square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face may exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be twebty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Window signs: Window signs are permitted, but total signage shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)  Wall signs: 
a.  One (1) sign per street frontage is permitted. Maximum square footage for the wall sign shall be two (2) square feet for each linear foot of building frontage on the public right-of-way, or one (1) square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face may exceed one hundred (100) square feet, except as provided in subsection b., below. 
b.  Where the structure upon which a wall sign is located is greater than fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of the nearest public street, the maximum square footage shall be as follows: 

 
c.  In addition, each individual occupant of a building shall be allowed one (1) swinging or projecting sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, attached under the eave or awning of the building, not projecting more than four (4) feet from the front wall, located above a business entrance, and not designed to be primarily visible from the road. 
(4)  Signs on multi-tenant lots: 
a.  On all multi-tenant lots having less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross leasable area, each individual establishment shall be permitted wall signage as though each individual establishment was an individual building with individual street frontage. Where such multi-tenant premises has a frontage of two hundred (200) lineal feet or more on either an arterial or collector street, an additional double-faced ground sign shall be permitted, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face, and no greater than fifteen (15) feet in height. Such additional ground sign shall be no closer than one hundred twenty (120) feet from the primary ground sign on the lot. 
b.  On multi-tenant lots having twenty-five thousand (25,000) or more square feet of gross leasable area, one (1) ground sign for the first five hundred (500) lineal feet of frontage adjacent to a street and one (1) additional ground sign for each additional five hundred (500) lineal feet of street frontage shall be permitted, provided that such ground signs on the lot shall be no closer than two hundred fifty (250) feet. Maximum surface area for each such ground sign shall be as follows: For multi-tenant lots having between twenty-five thousand (25,000) and one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of sign faces shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet; for multi-tenant lots having between one hundred thousand (100,000) and three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of ground sign faces shall be two hundred (200) square feet; for multi-tenant lots having greater than three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum square footage for ground sign faces shall be three hundred (300) square feet. 
(5)  Project entrance sign: 
a.  On state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet each, height limited to six (6) feet. 
b.  On roads other than state or federal highways, two (2) sign faces per entrance, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet each, height limited to four (4) feet. 
(e)  Billboards. Billboards are permitted only in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. In those districts billboards may be constructed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No billboard shall be constructed or permitted, except as a replacement for an existing billboard. No billboard which is also a multiple message sign shall be constructed or permitted, except as a replacement for 2.5 times as much existing billboard sign face area as the multiple message sign face area of the proposed billboard. The city shall maintain a list of all billboards in the city, including the location and total sign face of each sign. Any application for a billboard building permit shall identify the billboard or billboards that are being replaced by the new billboard. Replacement shall be performed within six (6) months after it has been determined that an existing sign or signs will be replaced by a new sign. 
(2)  Billboards shall be located at least seven hundred fifty (750) feet from any residential district, measured from the location of the base of the sign to the property line of the nearest residentially zoned lot. 
(3)  Billboards shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing billboard, measured from the base of the billboard to the base of the nearest existing billboard on the same side of the street. 
(4)  The restriction of fifty (50) percent of sign area generally applicable to multiple message signs under this article shall not apply to billboards which are also multiple message signs. 
(5)  The owner of each billboard shall file on or before January 31, 2009, and each succeeding year a statement from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, or some other person possessing qualifications acceptable to the building superintendant, certifying that the billboard has been inspected, and that it remains structurally sound and capable of safely carrying the loads placed upon it. If, upon inspection, it is determined that the billboard is not structurally sound, the engineer shall list the structural deficiencies and the actions which must be taken to correct the structural deficiencies. Prior to March 1 of the same year, the sign owner shall be required to take such actions and file a statement with the city certifying that each required repair has been completed. 
(f)  Interstate highway signs. Signs located along Interstate Highway 16 are unique due to the nature of the right-of-way acquired for the interstate's construction and maintenance. Therefore, properties located within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way of Interstate Highway 16 and within zones B-2, M-1 or M-2, may have one (1) additional double-faced ground sign. This additional sign shall be no more than one hundred (100) feet in height, and have no sign face greater than two hundred (200) square feet in area, shall not be located with three hundred (300) feet of another such sign, and shall be designed primarily to be visible from the interstate. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008; Ord. No. 12-13, §§ 2A, 2B, 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 3-38. - Safety and construction standards. 
(a)  Official confusion. Signs, which contain, or are an imitation of, an official traffic sign or signal, or can be confused with an official traffic sign, are prohibited. 
(b)  Fire safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation or door; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. 
(c)  Corner visibility. No sign or sign structure above a height of three (3) feet shall be maintained within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
(d)  Traffic visibility and safety. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct the traffic sight line, or the view of vehicles entering the roadway (i.e., the view of oncoming traffic by vehicles attempting to enter the road, or vice versa). No sign shall be erected on any traffic island. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-39. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs that, on the effective date of this article, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and that are nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this article, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(1)  No increase in size of the nonconforming sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Existing signs which were legally erected, which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this article due to road widening, may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this article, but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
(3)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(4)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size, shape, design, depth of sign face or weight of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article; provided that signs damaged by fire or an act of God may be restored by their original condition. 
(5)  Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected which would become nonconforming under this article upon annexation by the city shall be allowed to remain, provided such sign shall be registered with the city within ninety (90) days of annexation. 
(b)  Signs erected illegally under the previous ordinances, which are not conforming under the present ordinance from which this article derived, are declared illegal, and shall not be considered "nonconforming" under this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-40. - Sign and sign structure maintenance. 
(a)  The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(b)  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. Sign faces shall be maintained in good repair, and shall have neatly painted, posted or otherwise maintained display surfaces, free of defects such as holes, tears, cracks, breaks or missing portions, which are plainly visible from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue, and provide a reasonable amount of time to repair the violation. 
(d)  If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within the time provided, it shall be a violation of this article, subject to citation. The code enforcement officer may also institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the sign or sign structure. The reasonable cost of any action taken by the city, or its agents, to remedy the maintenance issue shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall constitute a lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-41. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit from the building superintendant. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for change of copy on any sign, replacement of the sign face, nor for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not enlarged in any way or otherwise modified. 
(b)  Application. Sign permits may be applied for by the owner of the property upon which the sign will be located, or by that person or entity's authorized agent. In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter or relocate any sign under the provisions of this article, an applicant therefore shall submit to the building superintendant a sign permit application, which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the lot on which the sign is located if different from those designated above. 
(3)  The location by street address of the proposed sign structure. 
(4)  A drawing of the proposed sign showing the type of sign to be erected, its height and shape, and construction specifications including how it is to be mounted or erected, prepared and signed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the work must be performed by a Georgia State-licensed electrical contractor, and the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. 
(6)  Each applicant shall present to the building superintendant on request a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(7)  Where the application is for a multiple message sign using electronic lighting as part of the display on the sign face, a copy of the sign manufacturer's specifications for luminosity shall be attached to the application. 
(8)  The distance from the sign to the nearest adjacent signs, it distance regulation apply. 
(9)  The size of the lot or parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(10)  All permits required under federal or state law, including but not limited to those required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(c)  Issuance of permit if application in order. It shall be the duty of the building superintendant, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this article to issue, within thirty (30) days from date of filing, to the applicant a written permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith. Sign permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner upon which the sign is to be located. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the building superintendant from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. 
(d)  Denial of permit. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause, that is, the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(e)  Permit duration. A sign permit shall become null and void if the construction of the sign for which the permit was issued has not begun within a period of six (6) months after the date of issuance and completed within twelve (12) months after date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(f)  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the building superintendent shall order the owner to remove the same immediately. If the owner fails to remove the same within thirty (30) days, the building superintendent shall proceed in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the building superintendent. 
(h)  Revocation. The building superintendent is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days after notification in writing. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the clerk shall revoke the permit. 
(j)  Permit fees. Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee of forty dollars ($40.00), payable upon application. An application for a ground sign having any sign face of thirty-two (32) square feet or greater in area shall require a permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). However, no permit fee shall be required for signs having no electrical connection and a sign face less than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-42. - Appeals. 
Appeals of the decisions of the building inspector under this article shall be to the City of Dublin Board of Zoning Appeals. The aggrieved party shall file such appeal in writing with the building inspector within ten (10) days of the date of the appealed decision. The board shall consider the appeal at a public meeting conducted within thirty-five (35) days of the filing of the appeal. The aggrieved party or its agent and the building inspector shall be allowed to present testimony and evidence as to whether the decision should be affirmed, reversed or modified. Such testimony and evidence shall constitute the record. The board of zoning appeals shall consider this record in light of the requirements and intent of this article, and shall vote to affirm, reverse or modify the decision at such public meeting. In the event that the board of zoning appeals fails to render a decision on the appeal within thirty-five (35) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the decision of the building inspector shall stand affirmed. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal to the Superior Court of Laurens County, Georgia, within thirty (30) days of the board of zoning appeal's decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-43. - Variances. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
Standards: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; 
(3)  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic; and 
(4)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the building inspector and shall be heard by the City of Dublin Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be heard under the same rules governing appeals. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Sec. 3-44. - Legal provisions. 
(a)  Any person or entity violating or refusing to comply with any provision of the ordinance from which this article derives, shall be subject to citation to the municipal court, and upon conviction, may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to sixty (60) days, to pay a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separation violation for purposes of citation and sentencing. The city may also seek civil remedies including injunctive, declaratory or any other available remedy in law or equity for violations of this article. 
(b)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence or word of this article is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this article. The city governing authority declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(c)  The ordinance from which this article derives, replaces the city's prior sign ordinance existing and in effect immediately prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. In the event all of this article is struck down as void, unconstitutional or invalid, including therefore this provision, that prior ordinance shall be considered to not have been repealed, and shall therefore still be in effect. 
(d)  This article shall take effect and be in force as of the date of its adoption, the public welfare of the City of Dublin demanding. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 9-18-2008) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-26, adopted July 21, 1988, repealed former Ch. 4, pertaining to alcoholic beverages, and added new provisions, relating to similar subject matter, as herein set out. Formerly, Ch. 4 originated from the 1964 Code, § 3.3, and the following legislation: 

 
Cross reference— Building and construction, Ch. 6; building code, § 6-68 et seq.; electrical code, § 6-87 et seq.; plumbing code, § 6-196 et seq.; licenses, Ch. 12; drinking in public, § 14-5; taxation, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A; off-street parking and loading, App. A, § 4.3. 
State Law reference— Intoxicating liquors, O.C.G.A., Title 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, the following words shall have the indicated meanings: 
Alcohol shall mean and include ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages shall mean and include, but are not limited to, malt beverages, vinous liquors and spirituous liquors, as defined herein. 
Brown bagging shall mean the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments licensed for consumption on the premises for the purpose of drinking the same at any such establishment. 
Building code shall mean and include all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of the city. 
Church shall mean any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Church property shall mean property on which a church is located, which includes all contiguous property in the tract which directly abuts the church, but not including property which lies on the opposite side of a street or railroad right-of-way which separates it from the property on which the church is located. 
College shall mean only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects, are taught. 
Distance . Unless otherwise defined herein, shall mean the measurement in lineal feet from the property line of the proposed location to the nearest property line of a church, school ground or college campus or family residence, along a straight line connecting the shortest distance between the two (2) property lines. 
Malt beverages shall mean fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, and containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
Minor shall mean any person who has not attained the legal age as set by the State of Georgia for the purchasing of alcoholic beverages. 
School shall mean only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects, are taught. 
School property shall mean property of state, county, city or church schools and such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, including playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts and other instructional areas contiguous to such property which is used by any such school for the purpose of teaching physical education, band or other subjects which constitute a part of the school's regular curriculum. 
Spirituous liquors shall mean all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Vinous liquors shall mean any and all wines, fortified and unfortified, produced either within or without the State of Georgia and containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-2. - Licenses and fees required; penalty for delinquent payment; display of license; time limit for commencement of operation. 
(a)  No malt beverage, vinous liquors, spirituous liquors or any other alcoholic beverage shall be sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued under this chapter by the city clerk. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code; and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter, then this chapter shall control. 
(c)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Wholesale —Business located outside the city limits of Dublin: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $100.00 
b.  Vinous liquors ..... 100.00 
c.  Spirituous liquors ..... 3,000.00 
(2)  Wholesale —Business located within the city limits of Dublin: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $780.00 
b.  Vinous liquors ..... 260.00 
c.  Spirituous liquors ..... 5,000.00 
(3)  Retail: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $550.00 
b.  Vinous liquors ..... 225.00 
c.  Spirituous liquors ..... 3,000.00 
(4)  Consumption on the premises: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $550.00 
b.  Vinous liquors ..... 225.00 
c.  Spirituous liquors 
1.  Restaurants and hotels ..... 3,000.00 
2.  Private clubs ..... 2,000.00 
3.  Nightclubs ..... 4,000.00 
(5)  Any combination of the above may be issued, provided no retail or wholesale spirituous liquor establishment shall hold any consumption-on-the-premises license for the same location. 
(d)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall be due and payable on the first day of January of each year, except as otherwise provided; and the license issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee may request renewal of a license for the following year by filing an application for renewal with the clerk between December 1 and December 30. Persons subject to license who fail to pay said license before expiration each year shall be subject to a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount due and unpaid. Persons subject to license who fail to renew said license on or before January 10 of each year shall be subject to forfeiture of the license. 
(e)  Licenses shall be issued only to natural persons, corporations or limited liability companies. Partnerships shall not be issued licenses in a partnership name, but partners may be licensed individually. Anyone issued any wholesale, retail malt beverage, wine or liquor license, or consumption-on-the-premises license by the city shall be required to display said license in a prominent place on the licensed premises. 
(f)  All businesses issued licenses under this chapter must, within ninety (90) days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses, and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make a written request to the city clerk for an extension of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, and the city clerk at his or her discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 2, 3, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-3. - Applications for new license. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code on general business and occupational licensing shall apply in addition to the following. 
(b)  The "applicant" for a license hereunder shall be the actual owner of the proposed licensed business and may be a natural person, a corporation or a limited liability company. 
(1)  Where the applicant is a corporation, "applicant" shall be the president and secretary, and each officer must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition the corporation shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a limited liability company, "applicant" shall include all members and the manager, if the company is manager-managed, and each member and manager must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(3)  Partnerships shall not be issued licenses in a partnership name, but partners may be licensed individually. 
(c)  All approved applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check for all the minimum fees and business taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. All applicants for a new license (specifically excluding transfers or renewals) shall include with their application a new applicant fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  The city application shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms, along with a city supplemental application form attached along with the following: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning approval and compliance; 
(2)  Proof of required off-street parking in accordance with section 4.3 of appendix A of the Dublin City Code; 
(3)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(4)  A legal description of the property upon which the premises is located; 
(5)  A current photograph of the applicant; 
(6)  Fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the police department (the police department will charge a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the fingerprint check); 
(7)  A letter of clearance from the clerk of the city municipal court, showing that the applicant has no criminal charges pending and/or no convictions in the past two (2) years; 
(8)  An affidavit from the city engineer, stating that the establishment complies with the distance requirements contained in this chapter (the city engineer will charge a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for this affidavit); 
(9)  A cashiers check or cash bond conditioned upon the applicant and the applicant's employees at the licensed establishment complying with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city governing the issuance and control of a retail or consumption on the premises spirituous liquor license. The bond shall remain in force as long as the license and its renewals are valid and subsisting and shall be for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(10)  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Laurens County, showing that the applicant has caused to be published in said legal organ, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, a notice, showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license applied for, and the time and place the city clerk shall act on the application. 
(e)  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct and providing, further, that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his other business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, the acts of the general assembly, known as the "Revenue Tax Act to Legalize and Control Alcoholic Beverages and Liquors," as amended, and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(f)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-5-98; Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 4-7, 4-6-2006; Ord. No. 10-10, § 3, 6-17-2010) 
Sec. 4-4. - Sham applicant; de facto owner and manager. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file, or permit to be filed, an application for license wherein a sham owner or a sham manager is named. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant to file an application for license, containing his name as owner, or the name of manager, when such person is not the de facto owner or the de facto manager, as the case may be. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his name to be used on an application for license where such person will not be the de facto owner of the license or the de facto manager, as the case may be. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license, or permit his name to be used in such application, where the application contains a nominal owner and a nominal manager for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article, restricting applicants and managers to persons without criminal records, or for any other elusive purpose. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-5. - Age of applicants and employees. 
(a)  All applicants, including the officers of a corporate applicant, and the members (and manager if applicable) of a limited liability company applicant must be natural persons and be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This Code section shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. >No. 06-04, § 8, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-6. - Residency required; agents. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this chapter and all actual owners of establishments for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of Laurens County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of Laurens County during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, unless they comply with subsection (b) as to a registered agent. 
(b)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall name in the application one (1) or more natural persons who reside in Laurens County as the registered agent of the license holder. Such person shall be the representative of the license holder who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. Such person shall receive all communications, notices, services of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the license holder in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any City of Dublin license. The application shall give the physical and mailing address of the person named as agent. The mailing to any such person at their mailing address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the license holder. If any such person named as agent shall cease to be a resident of Laurens County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his or her place; and written notice shall be given to the clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. The registered agent shall provide those personal items required in section 4-3. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 9, 10, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-7. - Approval required. 
All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the chief of police or a designee thereof as a condition of the issuance of a license. The chief of police or his designee shall review the application and make an investigation of the applicant. In the event that the chief of police determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal law, state law, this Code or his police department investigation, he shall so notify the city clerk. The city clerk shall notify the applicant of pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 11, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-8. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions prohibited. 
No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest, either as an employee, owner, partner or principal stockholder, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or conviction of two (2) or more misdemeanors of any state of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations, within two (2) years; the term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-9. - Denial of license application; granting. 
(a)  A city license may be denied under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)  Failure to provide required valid information, documents and the like; 
(4)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)  Failure to pass review by the chief of police; 
(6)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agents; 
(7)  Prior convictions as herein provided; 
(8)  Failure to provide required off-street parking facilities for patrons, as provided in section 4.3 of appendix A of the Dublin City Code; 
(9)  Improper location which would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom; 
(10)  Prior history or reputation of any building or establishment for fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; other violations of the law; or 
(11)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(b)  Otherwise, the city clerk may issue any city license provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking the permits or licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 12, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-10. - Appeals. 
Any and all appeals of the outcome of the licensing procedure will be made to the Municipal Court of the City of Dublin. All appeals of the outcome of the licensing procedure will be made to the Municipal Court of the City of Dublin. Application for appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Clerk of the Municipal Court of Dublin within fifteen (15) days of the denial of the license. Upon filing of an appeal the court shall schedule a hearing at which the applicant shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 13, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-11. - Regulations. 
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in an act of the general assembly known as the "Revenue Tax Act to Legalize and Control Alcoholic Beverages and Liquors," as amended, and those prescribed by the state department of revenue. In addition, all businesses, the applicant for the license, the manager in charge of the business, and the owner and owners thereof shall observe and obey the following regulations prescribed hereby by the mayor and council, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-12. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall, at all times during the period allowable by law for the operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the police department, or to any license inspector of the city or to any person designated by the chief of police. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-13. - Open containers prohibited; exception. 
No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises upon which the place of business in conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed is bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere, unless the establishment is licensed for the consumption on the premises of that particular classification of alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-14. - Legal times of sale and purchase. 
(a)  Retail liquor, packaged to go. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person employed by a licensee of spirituous liquor, packaged to go, to sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others, any spirituous liquor between the hours of 11:45 p.m., Saturday night, and 8:00 a.m. the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on other days of the week; and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from such a licensee, or a person employed by such a licensee, any spirituous liquor between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on other days of the week. 
(b)  Beer and wine packaged to go. It shall be unlawful for an licensee or person employed by a licensee to sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any beer or wine, packaged to go, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night and 1:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning. 
(c)  All alcoholic beverages, consumed on-premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person employed by a licensee to sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises, as defined in this article, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee, or person employed by a licensee, any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises, as defined in this article, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(d)  Dual licenses. In the event that any establishment holds both a consumption-on-the-premises license and packaged-to-go license for alcoholic beverages, then the hours governing establishments holding a consumption-on-the-premises license shall prevail. 
(e)  Thanksgiving and Christmas. The sale of alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever in the city shall be prohibited on Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 11-16-89) 
Sec. 4-14.1 - Sunday consumption on premises. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, in particular Code sections 4-14 and 4-15, any establishment holding a license for consumption on the premises which derives at least fifty percent (50%) of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, and any such licensed establishment which derives at least fifty percent (50%) of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging is authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages by the drink on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete an application form and affidavit furnished by the city finance officer. Applicants shall submit to the city finance officer a certification by a certified public accountant that the applicant meets one (1) of the requirements set out in subsection (a). This certification shall be based upon a review of the applicant's total gross annual income for the licensed location during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding their application for a permit under this section. If the applicant has been in business for less than twelve (12) months at the proposed location for Sunday sales, then such certification shall be for the time that the applicant has been in business, annualized. If the applicant is filing an application for a new business, a certification from a public accountant will not be required for the initial application, but instead, the applicant must certify under oath that the person applying for the Sunday sales permit intends to meet the requirements set out in subsection (a). A certification from a public accountant will be required upon each renewal thereafter. 
(c)  Upon determination by the city finance officer that the applicant is eligible for a Sunday sales permit, the city finance officer shall issue the permit, which shall be kept permanently and prominently displayed by the licensee in his place of business. It shall be a violation of this Code for any licensee to fail to display such permit as provided in this subsection. 
(d)  The determination of an establishment's eligibility to obtain a Sunday sales permit shall be made annually upon the renewal of their consumption-on-the-premises license. Prior to renewal of such permit the licensee shall submit current information regarding eligibility as required in subsection (b). During the twelve-month term of the licensee's Sunday sales permit, the establishment shall remain in full compliance at all times with the requirements set out in subsection (a). 
(e)  Any person who shall give materially false statements in an application for a Sunday sales permit, or who shall make Sunday sales after the licensee knows that it is no longer qualified to make Sunday sales under the provisions of this section, or who otherwise fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed in violation of this Code and upon conviction, shall be punished in the municipal court of the city as provided by section 1-10 of the Code. The court may in addition order the revocation of any Sunday sales permit held, and further order the revocation of any other alcohol sale license or permit held by the offender. If the establishment's license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is suspended, probated or revoked as provided in this chapter, then the permit for Sunday sales shall also be suspended, probated or revoked in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-12, 7-21-2016) 
Sec. 4-15. - Legal hours for drinking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any person to drink any alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m., Sunday morning, and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-1988; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-1989; Ord. No. 89-18, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 6-17-2010) 
Sec. 4-16. - Possession of glass, opened bottle or other opened container of alcoholic beverage, when prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any glass containing any alcoholic beverage, or any opened and unemptied bottle or other opened container of any alcoholic beverage, to remain in or on the premises of the place of business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. on Sunday morning and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. Opened liquor bottles kept behind a bar and used to prepare mixed drinks are exempt from this requirement. It shall also be unlawful for any customer or other person to have in his or her possession any opened bottle containing any alcoholic beverage in any place of business licensed under this chapter between the hours of 1:00 a.m. on Sunday morning and 6:00 a.m. the following Monday morning and between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. It is the purpose and intent of this section to assist in the enforcement of the regulations against drinking beer, wine, and other alcoholic beverages between the hours set forth in this section, and the mayor and the city council find that the regulations herein imposed are necessary for the proper regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-17. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in billiard rooms. 
Alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of a billiard room, if the establishment derives at least seventy-five (75) per cent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 88-31, 10-20-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 96-8, 4-4-96) 
Sec. 4-18. - Minors; prohibited practices; sale to same; identification. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his possession, custody and control, or to have in any vehicle in his possession, custody and control, any malt or alcoholic beverages of any type, kind or description whatsoever within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to either purchase or attempt to purchase from any person any malt or alcoholic beverages of any type, kind or description whatsoever within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer to sell or give away to any minor under twenty-one (21) years of age any malt or alcoholic beverages of any type whatsoever within the city. 
(d)  Proof of identification needed to purchase alcoholic beverages and/or tobacco products. It shall be unlawful at retail establishments for any person to sell or for any person to purchase alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever not for consumption on premises or tobacco products in the city unless the purchaser exhibits proper identification to the seller so that the seller may verify the age of such person. For purposes of this chapter, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both and giving such person's date of birth and includes without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized by O.C.G.A., §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate, or any traffic citation or complaint form. This section applies to all persons regardless of age, and regardless of whether or not such person appears to be of proper age to purchase alcoholic beverages or tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 99-2, 3-18-99) 
Sec. 4-19. - Duration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Duration and renewal of licenses under this chapter shall be as for business and occupational licenses generally, and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any city license. 
(b)  No licenses under this chapter may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-20. - Transfer of licenses; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this chapter may be transferred to another person who will operate at the same location, provided that person makes application to the city for a new license, as required in section 4-3, (except that the new licensee shall not have to provide those items listed in subsections 4-3(d)(1)—(4) and (d)(8)) and otherwise meets the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  A transfer of location shall be allowed for any license under this chapter, provided the licensee files with the city clerk the following on the new location: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(3)  A legal description of the property upon which the new premises is located; 
(4)  An affidavit from the city engineer, stating that the establishment complies with the distance requirements contained in this chapter (the city engineer will charge a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for this affidavit); 
(5)  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Laurens County, showing that the transferor has caused to be published in said legal organ, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, a notice, showing the name and address of the transferor, the name of the transferee, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license held, and the time and place the clerk shall act on the application. 
(c)  An application for transfer shall be made within five (5) days of change of the licensee and shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Upon receipt of an application for transfer, which meets the requirements of this section, and upon the surrender of the existing license, the city clerk may issue a license to the applicant. 
(d)  Any transfer allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application or license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 14, 4-6-2006; Ord. No. 10-10, § 4, 6-17-2010) 
Sec. 4-21. - Fines, suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended for a definite time or may be revoked and the licensee fined if the licensee or any employee of licensee has been convicted of a felony, or of a violation of any ordinance of the city, or any state or federal law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances. The forfeiture of bond or collateral or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(b)  Upon conviction in any court of the State of Georgia of any violation of any penal provision incorporated in this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the city judge shall issue punishment as follows: 
(1)  First offense: A minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and five (5) days' suspension of license; 
(2)  Second offense (within a twelve-month period of the first offense): A minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and the license shall be suspended for not less than ten (10) days: 
(3)  Third offense (within a twelve-month period of the second offense): Any cash bond shall be forfeited, the license shall be revoked and no new license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation for a period of twelve (12) months at that location; 
(4)  The above fines shall be charged to both offenders, the purchaser and the seller, individually. 
(c)  Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended for a definite time or may be revoked and the licensee fined if the city judge has determined that there is probable cause to believe that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has violated a state or federal law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances. The procedure for making such determination shall be: 
(1)  The chief of police, after obtaining reliable information that such a violation has been committed, shall cite the licensee to appear for a hearing on a day certain before city court and shall advise the licensee of the law believed to have been violated. 
(2)  The city court judge, after hearing evidence, shall make a determination whether there is probable cause to believe the alleged violation has been committed. 
(d)  All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee thereof, provided the municipal court may only impose a penalty as outlined under this section. 
(e)  The license of any entity that has not paid a fine or fee imposed for any reason shall be void and immediately surrendered to the city if the fine or fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of imposition. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 92-2, 4-16-92; Ord. No. 06-04, § 15, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-22. - Outstanding licenses; compliance assumed. 
(a)  All licensees holding valid licenses issued under this chapter as of July 21, 1988, shall be deemed to have complied with all requirements as to the application and issuance of a license under this chapter. Renewals and transfers of licenses at the same location shall also be deemed in compliance. Transfers to new locations must comply with all requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Any establishment holding a consumption-on-the-premises license prior to the above date shall be eligible to obtain other consumption-on-the-premises licenses for the same location. 
(c)  Any new license or location transfers issued after the above date must comply with all requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-23. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be authorized on any election days; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days during such times as the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-24. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No license controlled by this chapter shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer to sell distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any church property, as defined in this chapter or any facility licensed as an alcoholic treatment center or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school property or college campus. This restriction shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the thirty-six (36) months immediately preceding such application. 
(b)  The school building or educational building referred to hereinabove shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which subjects, commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, are taught. 
(c)  The distances refereed to hereinabove are to be measured pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder by the state revenue commissioner. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to the adoption of this section, nor to the renewal of such license. 
(e)  The location of a new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall not be authorized within five hundred (500) yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel licensed under this chapter. This restriction shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the retail sale of distilled spirits was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no church, school building, educational building, school property, college campus or any facility licensed as an alcoholic treatment center, wherever located, shall prevent the licensing and location of a restaurant serving alcohol within the otherwise prohibited distance of such church, school building, educational building, school property or college campus or facility licensed as an alcoholic treatment center, if such restaurant location fronts: 
(1)  On the north or south side of Jackson Street between Monroe and South Washington Streets; 
(2)  On the north or south side of Madison Street between Monroe and South Washington Streets; 
(3)  On any of the connecting streets south of Jackson and north of Madison in the area described above; 
(4)  On either side of Jefferson Street from Jackson Street south to the railroad right-of-way; 
(5)  On either side of Hillcrest Parkway from Brookhaven Drive to Veterans Boulevard; or 
(6)  On either side of Shamrock Drive from Moss Creek Lane to Hillcrest Parkway. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 96-14, 7-11-96; Ord. No. 97-13, 8-21-97; Ord. No. 03-31, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 06-04, § 16, 4-6-2006; Ord. No. 08-26, 12-18-2008; Ord. No. 14-10, 11-20-2014; Ord. No. 15-10, 10-15-2015) 
Sec. 4-25. - Brown bagging prohibited. 
Brown bagging shall be unlawful at all business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 89-5, adopted Mar. 9, 1989, § 4-25 pertained to sale of alcoholic beverages on Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day and derived from Ord. No. 88-35, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1988. 
Sec. 4-26. - Obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment on premises where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to perform any acts in a public place that are in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8 regarding public indecency. 
(b)  A licensee is guilty of permitting obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment when having control of the business establishment's premises, which it knows or has reasonable cause to know is being used by any person to appear on the premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view portions of the pubic area, anus, anal cleft, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or used by any female to appear on the premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate that portion of the breast described herein, it permits such activity or fails to make reasonable and timely effort to halt or abate such activity or use. 
(c)  Performing acts constituting public indecency as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8 is a violation of state law and shall be punished as provided therein. 
(d)  Permitting obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment as set forth in subsection (b) of this section is a violation and shall be punished in the municipal court of the city as provided under section 4-21 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-27. - Unlawful conduct. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices in the licensed premises or to operate the business carried on the licensed premises in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Disturbances. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or licensee's agent or employee, to fail to report to the police department any disturbance which occurs immediately outside the licensed premises or in the parking facilities, of which any of them have knowledge. 
(c)  Availability of telephone. It shall be the requirement that every licensed premises have a telephone and have such telephone available during the hours of operation. Failure to have a telephone shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of all licenses. 
(d)  Illegal drugs or narcotics. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, or licensee's agent or employee, to report to the police department any usage or possession of illegal drugs or narcotics on a licensed premises. 
(e)  Assistance to law enforcement officers. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or licensee's agent or employee, to fail to assist any law enforcement officer in the performance of such person's duty while said officer is on a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-28. - Prohibited types of entertainment, attire and conduct in establishments with alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  Prohibited. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises within the City of Dublin: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment whereby any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance, house, museum, or theater which derives less than twenty (20) per cent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder with maximum punishment not to exceed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Jurisdiction over violations of this section shall be in the City of Dublin Municipal Court and procedures for enforcement shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 10, art. 4. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, §§ 2, 3, 5-20-93) 
Sec. 4-29. - Alcohol on city property. 
(a)  Except as set out herein below, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages upon property owned by the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(b)  Pursuant to a policy proposed by the city manager and approved by the city council, alcohol shall be allowed at the following: 
(1)  Riverview Golf Course. The City of Dublin may sell alcohol by the drink at Riverview Golf Course. 
(2)  Emory Thomas Auditorium. Possession of alcohol, but not the sale thereof by the drink, shall be allowed at the Emory Thomas Auditorium, but only at events sponsored by non-profit groups recognized as such under 26 USC 501(c). 
(3)  Theatre Dublin . Possession of alcohol shall be allowed at Theatre Dublin and the associated parking areas, but only at City approved events. The Downtown Dublin Development Authority is allowed to sell alcohol by the drink at Theatre Dublin and the associated parking areas at events approved by them. The Downtown Dublin Development Authority shall comply with all federal and state regulations concerning the sale of alcohol by the drink when engaged in the activity of selling alcohol by the drink. The Theatre Dublin is specifically excluded from any requirements of section 4-24 - Distance Requirements within this Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Carnegie Library. Possession of alcohol, but not the sale thereof by the drink, shall be allowed at the Carnegie Library and the associated parking areas, but only at city approved events. 
(5)  Bicentennial Plaza. Possession of alcohol, but not the sale thereof by the drink, shall be allowed at the Bicentennial Plaza and associated parking areas, but only at city approved events. 
(c)  The city council may delegate to any entity managing the above named city properties the power to allow or forbid alcoholic beverages, and to approve events, pursuant to this ordinance. The city may place whatever conditions or limitations on such delegation it feels are appropriate. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, possession of alcohol and sale by the drink of alcohol may be allowed on any city property for a special event upon application by the majority of any board, council, or committee with members appointed by the Mayor and City Council of Dublin. Said application shall be submitted to the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event in question and be reviewed and approved or denied by the city manager. Upon receipt of any application under this subsection (d), the city clerk shall immediately forward the application and any other documentation submitted to the city manager and the chief of police for review. The city manager shall review the application and, after consultation with the chief of police, sign the same with his approval or rejection. No special event under this subsection (d) may be approved for more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days. The city manager may place any special restrictions concerning alcohol on city property as he deems in the best interest of the city. 
The applicant shall supply the following information: 
(1)  The name of the special event; 
(2)  The city property desired to be included in the exemption from the general prohibition against alcohol on city property; 
(3)  The name of the board or committee making the request and attach a copy of a letter requesting the exemption with the signatures of a majority of the members of the board or committee applying; 
(4)  The proposed date(s) of the special event, to be at least fifteen (15) days after the application is submitted; 
(5)  A description of how the special event will benefit the City of Dublin; 
(6)  Whether the special event will require a pre-purchased ticket or not; 
(7)  A description or drawing describing or depicting the specific use of the city property for the special event, including locations of any and all temporary structures that will be placed on the property; 
(8)  Whether or not alcohol will be sold by the drink, distributed, or simply allowed on the property; 
(9)  If alcohol will be sold by the drink, the applicant shall also submit copies the corresponding license or licenses permitting the sale of alcohol by the drink or, if no license exists, the corresponding appropriate application for a license to authorize the sale of alcohol by the drink; 
(10)  Whether or not security will be provided and a description of the security detail to be provided for, if any; and 
(11)  Any other information requested by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 14-04, 7-10-2014; Ord. No. 16-07, 5-5-2016; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 6-15-2017) 
ARTICLE II. - SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS 

Sec. 4-30. - Scope of article. 
In addition to the business and occupational license requirements of this Code and article I of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and sale of spirituous liquor in the city, and should any section of this article conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-31. - Posting of chapter provisions. 
All holders of spirituous liquor licenses shall keep a copy of this chapter posted in the licensed premises and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves and thoroughly instruct each employee of the establishment with respect to the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-32. - Posting of signs prohibiting sales to minors. 
The holder of any spirituous liquor licenses shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four (4) inches high reading: "Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Prohibited," and specify age of minors. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-33. - Limitation on sale or transfer of business and license. 
It shall be unlawful and shall call for immediate revocation of all licenses involved, both of seller and purchaser, for any spirituous liquor licensee to purchase the business or license of any other such licensee in excess of two (2) and attempt to operate the purchased business in addition to the businesses operated by the purchaser. In the event of a bona fide sale of any business under this article to persons other than other such licensed dealers, full disclosure of the persons involved, the purchase price, and any other information as is required by this Code for a new license shall be filed with the city clerk as a condition to any sale. In addition to the revocation of the license of any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section, that person, firm or corporation, and/or its officers and agents, shall be subject to punishment in the municipal court as for other violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-34. - Limitation on types of establishments permitted for consumption on the premises. 
No spirituous liquors may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises unless the business or proposed business to be licensed is a bona fide restaurant, hotel, private club, or nightclub as defined herein: 
(1)  Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with a full-service and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a seating capacity of at least fifty (50) people and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least two (2) meals per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating; and the serving of such meals shall account for at least fifty (50) per cent of revenues with the serving of spirituous liquors to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. Restaurants licensed to serve liquor by the drink shall be required to prepare such drinks in a separate room connected with and a part of the restaurant, but segregated from the dining area. Drinks may be served in said room or in the dining area with meals. 
(2)  Hotel shall mean a building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall have a minimum of fifty (50) rooms available for hire. Hotels shall be licensed to serve liquor by the drink in any dining room with meals or operate a lounge in which drinks are served. A lounge shall be a separate room or building connected with and a part of the hotel. There shall be no additional license fee for a lounge. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for operation of any licensed establishment herein and the holder of the franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. Motels meeting the same qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. 
(3)  Private club shall mean a nonprofit corporation or association organized under the laws of this state, which: 
a.  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members. 
c.  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
d.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages, beyond a fixed salary. "Fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide club as may be fixed for such person by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body of the organization out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation, will not be considered to be from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Nightclub shall mean an establishment having a seating capacity of at least fifty (50) persons (with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view) and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment a minimum of twenty (20) days per month with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and which shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its patrons. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-35. - Requirements as to building for consumption on the premises. 
No spirituous liquor may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and a legal description and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or proposed building shall comply with all local building codes and other applicable regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which said license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. The seating area of such a building or portion thereof where spirituous liquor is served shall be determined by standards of the National Fire Code, with a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet and shall contain seating for a minimum of fifty (50) patrons. The maximum occupant load of such a building shall be determined by using National Fire Code standards, as amended, and shall be posted over every entrance and exit. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Secs. 4-36—4-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEER AND WINE 

Sec. 4-39. - Scope of article. 
In addition to the general business and occupational license requirements of this Code and article I of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail malt beverage or vinous liquor establishments in the city; and should any section of this article conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-40. - Posting of chapter provisions. 
All holders of licenses issued under this article shall keep a copy of this chapter posted in the licensed premises at all times and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves and thoroughly instruct each employee of the establishment with respect to the applicable provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-21, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Secs. 4-41—4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-46. - Levied. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax in the amount of $0.004166 per ounce of malt beverages sold by such wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section; but in lieu thereof, there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city an excise tax of six dollars ($6.00) for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city, and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(c)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wines within the city an excise tax computed at the rate of eighty cents ($0.80) per wine gallon on all wine sold by such wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city, and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(d)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling spirituous liquors within the city an excise tax computed at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter or pro rata portion thereof upon all spirituous liquors for retail sale within the city. This excise tax shall apply only to wholesale dealers of spirituous liquors for retail sales and shall not apply to holders of a spirituous liquor consumption-on-the-premises license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-47. - Report required. 
Each wholesale dealer who has sold alcoholic beverages within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all malt beverages or wines by size and type of container for the month sold within the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-48. - Remittance. 
Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which sales of malt beverages, wine or spirituous liquors were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-49. - Stamps, decals not required. 
No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages or wines sold within the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-50. - Taxes cumulative. 
The excise taxes provided for by the provisions of this article shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages, wines or spirituous liquors at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-51. - Penalty for delinquency. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) per cent of the total amount due during the first thirty-day period following the date such report and remittance were due, and a further penalty of ten (10) per cent of the amount of such remittance for each successive thirty-day period, or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to fifty (50) per cent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to said wholesale dealer. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-52. - Penalty for violations. 
In addition to being punishable as required in section 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances, any first violation of this article by a wholesale dealer of malt beverages and wine shall be deemed a sufficient ground for a fifteen- to ninety-day suspension by the mayor and city council of the license issued to the violator by the city. Other violations of this article by wholesale dealer shall be deemed a sufficient ground for a permanent revocation by the mayor and city council of the license issued to the violator by the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-26, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Secs. 4-53—4-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES TAX ON MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 4-58. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every sale of a mixed drink purchased in the city a tax on the purchase price of said drink. The rate of sales tax collected shall be three (3) per cent. Every licensee is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from the purchaser of mixed drinks sold within licensee's licensed premises. Such licensee shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city treasurer to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 17, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-59. - Determination; returns; payment. 
(a)  All amount of such cases shall be due and payable to the city treasurer monthly on or before the tenth day of the month following the sale of said mixed drink. 
(b)  On or before the tenth day of the month following the month of sale of the mixed drink, the return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city treasurer showing the gross revenues from sale of mixed drinks, the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-60. - Collection fee allowed licensees. 
Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers and Consumers Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951, (O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-61. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the city treasurer is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, such treasurer may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within such treasurer's possession or that may come into such treasurer's possession. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall give to the licensee written notice of such treasurer's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at licensee's address as it appears in the records of the city treasurer. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with return receipt signed by the licensee, any partner of the licensee, any officer of the licensee or manager of the licensee. 
(c)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the tenth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-62. - Determination if no return made. 
If any licensee fails to make a return, the city treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the licensee fails to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city treasurer. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 4-61(b). 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-63. - Penalty for delinquency. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a licensee liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) per cent of the total amount due during the first thirty-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten (10) per cent of the amount of such remittance for each successive thirty-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the licensee making such report liable for a penalty equal to fifty (50) per cent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the alcohol license issued by the city to said licensee. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89; Ord. No. 06-04, § 18, 4-6-2006) 
Sec. 4-64. - Collection of tax. 
At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city treasurer may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-65. - Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. 
(a)  If any licensee liable for any amount under this section sells the business or quits the business, licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such tax until the former owner produces a receipt from the city treasurer showing that such former owner has paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price as herein required, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by such purchaser to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-66. - Tax credit. 
Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city treasurer. If the licensee determines that such licensee has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city treasurer, licensee will have three (3) years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. Claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city treasurer, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or such person's administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
Sec. 4-67. - Confidentiality. 
The city treasurer shall maintain all tax returns as confidential documents and shall not permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this chapter, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, and assignees if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, 3-9-89) 
ARTICLE VI. - SALES OFF PREMISES FOR CATERED FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 4-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized catered function means a function held at a location within the city for which an event permit has been issued in accordance with this section. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 4 (sale of distilled spirits), Article 2 of Chapter 5 (sale of malt beverages), or Article 2 of Chapter 6 (sale of wine) of Title 3, Alcoholic Beverages, of the Official Code of Georgia, and who also holds a valid local license from a Georgia municipality or county. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-110. - Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers eligible for off-premise licenses; application; fee. 
(a)  Any person holding a valid current alcohol license from a Georgia municipality or county which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine, by the drink for consumption on the premises, or by the package for consumption off the premises, may be issued an off-premise license as a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. Upon issuance of the license, the licensee shall be authorized to sell or distribute in exchange for compensation distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine by the drink off premises in connection with an authorized catered function in conjunction with food service. 
(b)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his state or local alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  An alcoholic beverage caterer shall make application for an off-premise license as provided in subsection (a) of this Code section with the city clerk and shall pay to the City of Dublin an annual license fee in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). This fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid through December 31 of the year for which they are issued. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-120. - Event permits. 
(a)  In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply to the City of Dublin for an event permit. Each application shall require payment of a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). When the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer is domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the City of Dublin, the caterer shall pay to the City of Dublin an event permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto); and 
(2)  Provide satisfactory reports to the Georgia State Revenue Commissioner on forms provided by the Department of Revenue stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner; and 
(3)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event, and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rate provided by this chapter. Failure to report and remit the tax within seven (7) days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to the caterer for similar events; and 
(4)  Maintain original local event permits and all documents required by the Department of Revenue in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(b)  No event shall be permitted for longer than seven (7) days. After expiration of the event, the alcoholic beverage caterer shall apply for a new event permit in the same manner as the original period. 
(c)  When applying for a permit, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall use the form provided by the city clerk, and shall be required to provide the following: 
(1)  Name of caterer with proof of proper licensing; 
(2)  Date(s) of event; 
(3)  Time (hours) of event; 
(4)  Location (address) of event; 
(5)  Host or sponsor of event; 
(6)  Whether facility is private or public; 
(7)  Security and parking enforcement plans and personnel; 
(8)  Other information the city deems necessary to review a request for such permit. 
(9)  An affidavit from the city engineer stating that the location of the proposed sale or distribution of alcohol complies with all distance requirements governing the same. A one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) fee shall be paid for said affidavit. 
(d)  The application shall be signed by the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and the event host or sponsor. If the event host or sponsor is not the owner of the property at which the event will be held, then the owner of the property, or the owner's authorized agent, shall sign the application consenting to the distribution of alcoholic beverages at that location. 
(e)  An event permit may be refused by the city manager or his designee for any one (1) of the following reasons: 
(1)  Inadequate parking or enforcement personnel at the facility designated; 
(2)  Criminal record of host or caterer permit holder; 
(3)  Previous complaints on location or of applicant; 
(4)  Previous damage to facility by applicant or permit holder; 
(5)  Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(f)  As a condition of permit issuance, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances, and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(g)  No event permit will be issued for an event at any location with respect to which any alcohol license has been denied or revoked within the past twelve (12) months. 
(h)  Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-130. - Non-profit organizations. 
(a)  A valid non-profit organization recognized under subsection (c), (d), or (e) of 26 USC 501, known as the United States Internal Revenue Code may apply for a temporary permit for the sale or distribution of alcohol for a special event or festival. 
(b)  The application shall be made in the name of the non-profit organization and the names of the person or persons who will be responsible for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages during the special event or festival. The application shall contain the name of the special event or festival, the proposed location of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; the dates for the special event or festival; a statement of understanding and agreement to fully comply with all local, state and federal regulations concerning the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and any other information as may be requested by the city manager or his or her designee. The non-profit organization shall submit an application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) along with said application. A copy of the non-profit organization's 501(c)(3) determination letter from the IRS must be submitted along with the application or by-laws and corporate charter from the secretary of state's office. 
(c)  No permit under this section shall be authorized for more than seven (7) calendar days. 
(d)  The non-profit organization and persons named on the application who are permitted under this section shall: 
(1)  Submit to the city clerk a copy of their state permit or license authorizing the sale or distribution of alcohol for the event in question prior to the first day of the event; 
(2)  Comply with all laws and regulations of the City of Dublin, State of Georgia, and United States of America concerning the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Post a sign at the location(s) where alcoholic beverages will be sold or distributed that reads "Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Prohibited" and specify the age of minors. 
(4)  Obtain an affidavit from the city engineer stating that the location of the proposed sale or distribution of alcohol complies with all distance requirements governing the same. A one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) fee shall be paid for said affidavit. The city engineer shall file said affidavit with the city clerk. 
(e)  A permit under this section is subject to approval by the city manager and the chief of police and may be refused for any of the reasons listed for denial or refusal of other alcohol licenses within this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-140. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a food caterer to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business without a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this article to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine off premises except in connection with an authorized catered function within the scope of the event permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine during any hours in which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. It is the intent of this subsection to prevent any person employed by such caterer, or any other employee, to knowingly violate any prohibitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, relating to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any non-profit organization or any person acting on behalf of a non-profit organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages without first being permitted as required herein. 
(f)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be tried upon citation returnable to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-150. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement and carry out the provisions of this chapter, with the approval of the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-160. - Revocation of permit. 
Any license or permit issued under this article may be immediately revoked by the chief of police for due cause for a violation of this article, any other ordinance, or state or federal law which results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the licensee or permittee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 5-5-2016) 
Chapter 4½ - AMBULANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-10, §§ 1—3, adopted May 1, 1980, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included as Ch. 4½, §§ 4½-1—4½-3, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 4½-1. - Licenses, insurance required. 
No ambulance service shall operate within the City of Dublin, Georgia without a valid state license, a valid city license and insurance coverage issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia providing at least the minimum coverage required for ambulances under the laws of the state of Georgia. A copy of said licenses and a copy of a current and valid certificate of insurance shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 5-1-80) 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, § 12-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4½-2. - Requirements for attendants. 
When answering calls, ambulance attendants shall have on their person a current CPR card and a copy of a current EMT certificate. A copy of said card and certificate shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-10, § 2, 5-1-80) 
Sec. 4½-3. - Display of emergency light permit. 
An emergency light permit shall be displayed on the lower right corner of the front windshield of all in-service ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 80-10, § 3, 5-1-80) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, §§ 5-1—5-91, adopted April 20, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 5, §§ 5-1—5-91, and enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to animals and fowl and derived from Code 1964, § 4-1—4-2, 4-5, 4-6; Ord. of 4-18-67; Ord. No. 70-25, 7-6-70; Ord. No. 74-9, § § 4-19, 4-27(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), 4-28, 4-29(a), 4-30(a), (b), 7-1-74; Ord. No. 74-29(b), 7-1-74; Ord. No. 90-19, 8-16-90. 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. Tit. 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the premises of owner or premises owner has permission to be on, or not under control of owner by leash or otherwise under the physical control of a competent person. 
Hearing officer means the hearing officer designated by the City of Dublin. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by the governing authority, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-22, to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Domesticated means an animal raised so as to live in close proximity to man. Such animals shall include dogs and cats, as well as, varieties of poultry, livestock or reptiles. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
Inoculated and vaccinated means an animal that has been administered an antibiotic vaccine to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one (1) year. 
Kennel means a type of pen or cage for boarding or holding animals. 
Kennel operator means a person engaged in the commercial business of buying, selling or boarding animals. 
Mail means to send by regular mail, certified mail, or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Owner means any natural person or legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog, dangerous dog, vicious dog or other animal within this county. In the case of a dog or animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. A person who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than five (5) days shall be deemed an owner. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog, or vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Public nuisance animal is any animal that unreasonably annoys humankind, endangers the life or health of people or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens (other than their owners) enjoyment of life or property, and includes, but is not limited to any animal that: 
(1)  Is found at large; 
(2)  Damages or abuses property other than that of the owner or keeper; 
(3)  Disturbs persons by barking, biting, or chasing vehicles or persons; 
(4)  Attacks other animals; 
(5)  Attacks pedestrians (except dogs trained for this purpose and under control of owner or keeper); 
(6)  Barks, whines, honks, brays, cries or makes excessive noises; 
(7)  Defecates upon any public place or premises not owned or controlled by the owner or keeper unless waste is promptly removed by the animal owner or keeper; or 
(8)  Has been found by animal control officer to be a menace to public health, welfare, or safety. 
Records of an appropriate authority means any records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer, or animal control officer as provided in this article and by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-2. - Office of animal control. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of animal control, which the animal control officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control officer is authorized to issue citations to persons violating this chapter, for trial in the city court, also known as the Municipal Court for the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(c)  The animal control officer, as well as employees and agents of the animal control office and persons under his/her control and supervision, are empowered to seize animals as required by this chapter so long as the animals are within the incorporated areas of the City of Dublin, Georgia. These employees and agents of the office of animal control shall have the right to go on private property within the incorporated areas of the City of Dublin, Georgia for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, provided it is necessary for such purpose. The animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations and subpoenas to witnesses and require their appearance in the Municipal Court of Dublin on any matter relating to the enforcement of any of the provisions contained herein. 
(d)  Citations may be issued in person or sent by mail for enforcement of any of the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-3. - Dog control officer; appointment; compensation. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint and designate a dog control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The dog control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the governing authority. Services for a dog control officer may also be contracted for with the Laurens County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-4. - Interference with officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist, attack, verbally threaten, interfere with or hinder any law enforcement officer, the animal control officer, or their designees or agents in the performance of the duties imposed upon them by this Code of Ordinances or by state law. It is also unlawful to tamper with or remove traps set by the animal control officer or his agents in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-5. - Fee schedule for violations; exceptions; municipal court designation. 
Fines and fees for violations of ordinances within this chapter shall be set by the office of animal control designated by the governing authority and the municipal court judge authorized to hear violations pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-6. - State license required for certain commercial animal establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Breeding establishment means any establishment where pets are bred and a fee or compensation is received for the breeding and maintenance of such pets, such as stud service. 
Cattery means any establishment where a cat is maintained for breeding, boarding, training, holding, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
Grooming shop means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where a person maintains a dog or cat for bathing, dipping, clipping, trimming, brushing, or similar care of the appearance for a fee or compensation. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where dogs or cats are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. Similar purposes include, but are not limited to, activities of a breeding establishment, cattery, or grooming shop. 
Pet breeder means a pet dealer who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption only pets they have produced, except equine. This includes those produced for hobby, show purposes, breed improvement, or stock replacement. 
Pet dealer means a person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption pets they have produced, bought, or otherwise obtained, except equine. Equine dealers require a livestock dealers license from the state department of agriculture. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a pet dealer or operate an animal shelter, kennel, or stable unless such person has a valid license issued by the state commissioner of agriculture. Any person acting without a license in violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-7. - Molesting wild or migratory birds. 
The city is hereby declared a bird sanctuary and no person shall hunt, kill, trap or decoy wild or migratory birds or rob their nests of eggs or young in the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to shoot at or shoot birds with a gun, pistol, "BB" gun, air rifle, slingshot, or other instrument of like kind, or strike, or throw any object at a wild or migratory bird. 
In the event starlings, pigeons, or other similar birds are found roosting, nesting or inhabiting any locality within the corporate limits of the city in such numbers as to constitute a nuisance or health menace to persons or property, the same may be removed or destroyed as humanely as possible by the property owner where such roosting or nesting may occur. 
Nothing within this section shall prohibit the keeping of domestic fowl or ducks within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin provided such animals are caged or otherwise confined to the property of the owner in such condition that they do not constitute a public nuisance animal or animals. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the keeping of any birds intended to be pets within the home within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin, provided they are kept in such a manner as to not constitute a public nuisance animal or animals. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-8. - Keeping swine restricted. 
No person shall keep or raise a hog or other animal of the swine species within the city with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Places of business already located and doing business in the city whose business is slaughter houses and livestock commission sales. 
(b)  In areas where swine may be allowed by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Pot belly pigs or guinea pigs may be kept within the city as long as such animals do not constitute a public nuisance animal as defined within this chapter. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 5-9—5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-31. - Vaccinations and identification tag or marking required. 
(a)  The owners and keepers of all dogs, cats, and domestic wildlife, unless permitted by the wildlife resource division, are hereby required to have such vaccinated against rabies. No person shall own, keep or harbor any of these animals over six (6) months of age unless such animal is vaccinated. Any owner of each animal vaccinated shall keep a certificate of vaccination and make the same available upon request of the animal control officer or his/her designee upon request. 
(b)  The owner and keeper of all dogs and cats are hereby required to have identification on such animal. An identification tag must be on such animal at all times. Said tag must contain information that will allow the animal control officer to contact the owner or keeper of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-32. - Confinement. 
(a)  Duty to keep animal under restraint - While on property of owner. It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog to ensure that it is confined by way of a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by a chain or leash or, in some other physical manner, under the control of a competent person so that it cannot wander off the real property limits of the owner, it being the intent of this article that all dogs be prevented from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of their owners. 
(b)  Duty to keep animal under restraint - While off property of owner. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog to keep the dog under control at all times while the dog is off the real property limits of the owner. For the purposes of this section, a dog is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, is secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, or is properly confined within an enclosure with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-33. - Inhumane treatment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to secure an animal by a tether less than ten (10) feet in length and not tangle-resistant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal not to furnish such animal adequate food, water, shelter and protection from the elements. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to own any animal which is seriously sick or injured and not provide proper care for such animal. This section shall not be construed to include animals under active veterinary care. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-34. - Dogs and cats that attack. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat to allow said animal to bite, scratch, chase, snap or attack pedestrians, bicyclists, vehicles; or allow said animal to be a nuisance with the exception of said animal being in defense of property or person. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-35. - Female dogs and cats in heat. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a female cat or dog, while such animal is in heat or in season, to allow her to run loose. Said animal must be confined in a kennel or in a place of confinement, in such a manner said animal cannot get in or out of said kennel or place of confinement. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-36. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any animal in his possession or control to persistently or continuously bark, howl or make noise common to their species or otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. It shall likewise be unlawful to keep or maintain such animals in a manner as to produce noxious or offensive odors, or to otherwise endanger the health and welfare of surrounding inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-37. - Destruction of property. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any animal in his possession or control to destroy and/or disturb any property of another. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-38. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to abandon any dog, cat, or animal or to release it upon public or private property with the intention of abandoning said animal. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-39. - Livestock at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any hogs, cattle, mules, goats, sheep, horses, poultry or any other livestock to allow the same to run loose or be at large. All livestock found loose or at large will be in violation and shall be impounded by animal control or any deputy or police officer and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law. The owner of such livestock will be responsible for any contract removal, storage, hauling, or medical care of any such livestock impounded. The office of animal control will dispose of said livestock pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 4-3-1, et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-40. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane or adequate care; collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article; or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-41. - Putting out poison. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or intentionally put out poison or otherwise distribute on any premises within the city any poison in any form or manner whatsoever which is or may likely be sufficiently lethal or of such strength as to cause death to any animal or fowl. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall apply to poisons which are made for the sole purpose of killing and destroying insects, pests, rats and other rodents, if such poisons are not dangerous or injurious to human beings. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-42. - Cruel acts. 
No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal, nor shall any person harm or maim any animal except to defend his person or property or the person or property of another from injury or damage being caused by said animal or as specifically permitted by the state department of natural resources. In addition, said animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry may be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-43. - Threats involving animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to verbally threaten to kill, maim, poison or harm in any way any animal. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-44. - Duty to report accidents involving dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly injure a dog or cat by running over, or into same, or contacting same with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle. It shall also be unlawful to fail to immediately notify the owner of the dog or cat if the animal has an identification tag or tattoo. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-45. - Backyard breeders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the state department of agriculture pursuant to the Georgia Department of Agriculture License Regulation 40-13-13-.02, as amended, to operate as an animal shelter, kennel, breeding establishment, cattery, grooming shop, pet breeder, or pet dealer. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-46. - Dog fighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, train for, attend or own any animal for the participation of any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one (1) or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or destroying themselves or any other animal with the exception of any activity permitted under state game and fish laws. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-47. - Unlawful interference with animal ownership. 
No person shall, without the knowledge of, or consent of the owner, hold or possess any animal which he does not own for more than seventy-two (72) hours without first reporting the possession of such animal to the animal control office. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-48. - Failure to surrender animal upon demand. 
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer or his agents. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-49. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
(a)  Owners of animals picked up by the office of animal control have the right to redeem the same upon payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animals; provided, however, the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine or punishment which may be imposed, by the Municipal Court of Dublin. 
(b)  Impounded dogs and cats and animals will be held at the county animal shelter or other designated shelter for a period of five (5) days, except for animals collared and tagged with proper identification, which shall be held for ten (10) days. Any such animal not redeemed within said time may be rescued, transferred to another agency, or disposed of in the most humane manner. The fees for these services shall be recommended by the office of animal control to be set by the governing authority. There may also be additional charges for feeding, boarding and caring for such animals. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 5-50—5-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 5-72. - Report and quarantine. 
Any animal which bites or scratches a person or another animal or which otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall be immediately reported to the office of animal control and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the office of animal control for a period of ten (10) days. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, if the vaccinations are current, or at an appropriate animal control facility, designated shelter, or at the veterinarian of the owner's choice and at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-73. - Disposition of dead rabid animals. 
If rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or a wild animal that has bitten or scratched another, the animal's carcass shall be turned over to the state health department for testing. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-74. - Area-wide quarantine. 
When the report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer may order an area wide quarantine for a period of up to sixty (60) days, in which all animals in the area determined appropriate by the animal control officer will be confined and no animals move in or out of such area. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-75. - Destruction and isolation of bitten animals. 
Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately euthanized. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the animal shall be placed in strict isolation for six (6) months, by a kennel designated by the health department, and vaccinated either upon entry to isolation or one (1) month before being released. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-76. - Surrender of carcass. 
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the county health department or the office of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-77. - Exceptions. 
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-78. - City court jurisdiction. 
The Municipal Court of Dublin shall have jurisdiction over all violations of any portion of this chapter, and shall have all powers granted to it which are necessary and incident to the hearing and disposition of matters brought before the court as defined by these ordinances and state law. The following persons have standing to file complaints for violations: 
(1)  Animal control officer or his agents; 
(2)  Dog control officer of his agents; 
(3)  Other law enforcement officers; 
(4)  Public Health Officials or officers; 
(5)  Individuals with personal knowledge of a violation upon filing a sworn affidavit with the municipal court or the Laurens County Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 5-79—5-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 5-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection. 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Local government means any county or municipality of this state. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Serious Injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(b)  No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense of assault or battery. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-101. - Enforcement officials. 
(a)  Generally. The office of animal control shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the state Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20, et. seq. 
(b)  Dog control officer. The City of Dublin shall designate a dog control officer to exercise the powers assigned to that position under the Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20, et. seq. 
(c)  Dangerous or vicious dog hearing officer. The City of Dublin has created the office of dangerous or vicious dog hearing officer and designated the municipal court judge to serve as such officer, performing the functions of an authority as that term is used in O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20 et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-102. - Investigations and determination. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 4-14-2. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(c)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within seventy-two (72) hours. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing before the hearing officer and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this division. If an owner cannot be located within ten (10) days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(d)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the hearing officer for good cause shown. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the hearing officer conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section, 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)  Judicial review of the hearing officer's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 15-9-30.9. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-103. - Impoundment. 
A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-104. - Registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. No more than one (1) certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this division. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one (1) vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-37, or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-40; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. Sections 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1; from the time of conviction until two (2) years after completion of his/her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with the provisions of this division. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten (10) days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-105. - Notifications by owner of change in dog's status. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves out of the city shall notify the dog control officer. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into the City shall register the dog as required in this division within thirty (30) days of becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-106. - Limitation on dog's presence off of owner's premises; penalty for violations; defense. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
i.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
ii.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each occurrence or day of violation. 
(d)  Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this division so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-107. - Confiscation by dog control officer; payment of costs for recovery; euthanasia. 
(a)  A dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this division. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this division may recover such dog upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this division, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by the dog control officer or the animal control hearing officer. All fines and all charge for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this division within fourteen (14) days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter or euthanized in an expeditious and human manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-108. - Governmental liability for enforcement. 
Under no circumstances shall the City or any employee, official, or agent of the City be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 5-109. - Penalty for violation of this division. 
Unless otherwise specified in this division, any person violating this division may be deemed guilty of violating a city ordinance and may be punished by a fine up to one thousand ($1,000.00) and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed twelve (12) months, or both fine and imprisonment. Said sentence may be probated. Each day that such violation continued to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of the sentence, may prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the City any animal during the term of the sentence, may order for the animal to be removed from the city or humanely euthanized, and may order restitution as deemed appropriate by the court. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 4-20-2017) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate building construction and adopt building codes by reference, § 1.4(14). 
Cross reference— Engineering standards and specifications adopted, § 2-3; building requirements for establishments serving alcoholic beverages, § 4-35; fire protection and prevention, ch. 10; licenses, ch. 12; unsafe buildings or structures, § 13-30 et seq.; noise provisions re construction, § 14-35; planning and zoning, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; excavations, § 20-53 et seq.; utilities, ch. 24; water conservation, § 24-47 et seq.; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Approval of plans for certain buildings by state fire commissioner, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words "technical code" or "technical codes" shall mean either the building code, electrical code, gas code, heating and air conditioning code, housing code, plumbing code or any other such code adopted by this city, whichever is applicable, or any combination thereof. 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and/or regulations to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare of the citizens of this city. 
Sec. 6-3. - New work to conform. 
(a)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this chapter, shall be installed, constructed, erected, altered or repaired within this city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this chapter, shall be altered in any manner that would be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any authorized rules or approval of the building inspector made and issued thereunder. 
Sec. 6-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing, air conditioning and heating, or electrical services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of the system owned or operated by a public service corporation or the water, or gas department of any city in this state, in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing, air conditioning and heating, or electrical systems, where such work is an integral part of the system owned or operated in rendering its duly authorized service as such, by a railroad company, pipeline company, mining company, public utility in the exercise of its normal functions as a public utility, or where such work is an integral part of any irrigation system on farms, ranches, or other open, unpopulated areas where such work will not be located within thirty (30) feet of any dwelling or any building devoted to animal husbandry. 
Sec. 6-5. - Use and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, use, repair, or alter any equipment, appliance or system that has been or will be installed, constructed or erected within the city, that is in violation or will violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this chapter, shall be used unless it is in a safe condition. 
Sec. 6-6. - Equipment, appliances or systems affected. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any equipment, appliance or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained or used in this city, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by this Code of Ordinances, statute or ordinance. 
Sec. 6-7. - Unsafe systems, etc.—Removal, discontinuance authorized. 
(a)  Systems, appliances or equipment covered by this chapter that may be or shall be found upon inspection to have become dangerous or unsafe, shall, unless made safe and so certified by the building inspector be removed or the use of same discontinued. 
(b)  The term dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment shall include systems, appliances or equipment structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; or otherwise dangerous to life or property. 
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Notice. 
(a)  Upon receipt of information that systems, appliances or pieces of equipment covered by this chapter are unsafe, the building inspector shall make or cause to be made an inspection; and if it is found that an unsafe condition exists, he shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or some one of the owners, executors, administrators, agents, lessees or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the systems, appliances or equipment are unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe, as may be deemed necessary by him. 
(b)  If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found, after diligent search, then such notice and order shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person; and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice. 
Sec. 6-9. - Same—Disregard of notice. 
If the person served with a notice or order to remove existing unsafe conditions from systems, appliances or equipment or discontinue the use of same, within a reasonable time as set by the building inspector to comply with the requirements thereof, the building inspector shall advise mayor and board of aldermen or the proper prosecuting authority of all the facts in the case, and shall institute an appropriate action in the courts to compel a compliance with such notice. 
Sec. 6-10. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector is satisfied that systems, appliances or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this chapter, is being erected, installed, altered or repaired, in violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter, or in violation of plans or specifications submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit issued thereunder, he shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  In case such notice or order is not promptly complied with, the building inspector shall request the city attorney or other proper prosecuting authority to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity, to restrain, correct or remove such violation, or the execution of work thereon, or to prevent the use of any systems, appliances or equipment, in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter or with respect to which the requirements thereof, or of any order or direction made pursuant to provisions contained therein, shall not have been complied with. 
Sec. 6-11. - Stopping work. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
Sec. 6-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction thereof in the city court shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner of a building, structure or premises, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
Sec. 6-13. - Abatement. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the use of any equipment, appliance or system covered by this chapter. 
Sec. 6-14. - Appeals. 
Any person, firm or corporation dissatisfied with any decision of the building inspector hereunder shall have recourse by appealing such decision to the board of zoning appeals, which body is also empowered to consider all such appeals whether the same concern zoning or other matters as to building permits. Such appeal shall be taken by giving notice of appeal to the board after having served a copy thereof on the building official, which notice must be given if an appeal is to be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision complained of. Such board shall then set a hearing within a reasonable time at its convenience and the convenience of the parties concerned at which hearing they shall hear and consider the matter and any evidence presented and at which time or within a reasonable time thereafter they shall render their decision. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3(111)) 
Secs. 6-15—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING INSPECTOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-78 et seq. 

Sec. 6-26. - Office created. 
There is hereby created in and for the city the office of building inspector. 
Sec. 6-27. - Appointment. 
The office of building inspector shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3(102.1)) 
Sec. 6-28. - Duties generally. 
The building inspector shall receive applications required by this Code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine the equipment, appliance or system for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of the law and this Code are met. He shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolitions, use, location, and maintenance of equipment, appliances or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of this city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this Code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguards, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
Sec. 6-29. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections required under the provisions of this Code shall be made by the building inspector or his duly authorized representatives. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in this city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this Code. The building inspector and his authorized representatives are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this Code, and are hereby invested with all police power necessary for the purpose of making arrests, issuing copies of charges and prosecution of any person or persons as may be charged with any violations of this Code of Ordinances or other ordinances of this city. 
(b)  All installations of any equipment, appliance or system for which a permit has been issued as prescribed in this Code shall be subject to inspection by the building official or his duly authorized representatives. 
Sec. 6-30. - Rules. 
(a)  The building inspector shall promulgate rules as prescribed in this chapter and consistent therewith, it being the intent of this requirement that the standards of federal and state bureaus, national technical organizations or fire underwriters, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall serve as a guide in fixing the minimum rules of practice under this chapter. 
(b)  For the purpose of securing for the public the benefits of new developments and yet insuring public safety, the building inspector shall make or cause to be made investigations, or may accept duly authenticated reports from recognized sources of new materials, equipment, appliances, or systems intended for use in this city which are not provided for in this chapter, and shall promulgate rules setting forth the conditions under which such materials, appliances, equipment or systems may be used. 
(c)  No rule of the building inspector shall become effective until four (4) weeks after notice of intention to enforce it shall have been given through the publication in a newspaper in general circulation in this city and until a public hearing on the same shall have been held; provided that said public hearing shall not be necessary unless a request shall have been made for such hearing during the said period of publication, by notice to the building inspector. Such rules must be drawn in its proposed form and open to public inspection at the time the notice to enforce is published. 
Sec. 6-31. - Records. 
(a)  The building inspector shall keep comprehensive records of applications, or permits issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to equipment, appliances or systems for which a permit has been issued for a period of not less than two (2) years after final inspection. 
(b)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at office hours observed by this city, but shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector. 
Secs. 6-32—6-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 6-43. - When required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, install, alter or repair or to commence the construction, erection, installation, alteration or repair of any equipment, appliances or systems provided for in this chapter without first filing with the city clerk an application in writing and obtaining a formal permit therefor. 
Sec. 6-44. - Application form. 
(a)  An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building inspector may prescribe. 
(b)  Such application shall be made by the owner or his authorized representative, and it shall be the responsibility of the owner to see that a permit is obtained before any installation or work is started. 
(c)  Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner. 
(d)  Such application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the building inspector for an intelligent understanding of the work. 
(e)  Each application submitted for permit shall be completed in all particulars in accordance with such form as may be provided for such purpose by the building official, and failure to complete the same and provide all other required information including plans, specifications, and plot diagram, shall be cause to refuse issuance of the permit. Further, each application shall bear the agreement signed by the property owner or his authorized agent acting in his behalf that the permit will be acted upon and the work done in full accordance with all laws, ordinances and regulations of the city and in accordance with the application, plans, specifications and plot diagram. No application shall be approved and no permit granted unless in accordance with the zoning laws of the city and all other laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3(105.2)) 
Sec. 6-45. - Application requirements. 
All requirements of this article as to filing applications shall be satisfied by filing the same in the office of the city clerk. At the time of submitting such applications, all water, gas, and sewerage tap fees or deposits, and the cost of the installation of driveway pipe, if necessary for access, shall be paid to the clerk. Further the applicant shall submit to the city clerk the required fee based upon the declared cost of improvement shown on the application, which payment shall be deemed and regarded as a deposit and receipt of which shall not finally determine payment of the required fee. The actual amount of the permit fee shall be determined by the building official according to the building valuation determined by him. Such fee so determined shall be paid in full before the permit shall issue. 
(Ord. No. 72-23, § 5-3(105.8), 6-5-72) 
Sec. 6-46. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  When required by the building inspector two (2) or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany every application for a permit required by the provisions of this article. Such drawings and specifications shall contain name and address of designer and information in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with this code. Such information shall be specific, and this chapter shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. 
(b)  The building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction and basis of calculations and they shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(c)  All drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and address of the designer. In the case of buildings or structures of Group A (Assembly), B (Business), and E (Educational), and all buildings or structures exceeding two (2) stories in height or five thousand (5,000) square feet in area and costing fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more except one- and two-family dwellings and farm buildings, such designer shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, 6-21-2018) 
Sec. 6-47. - Fees. 
The fees to be charged for any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 71-25, § 5-3(107.4), 7-6-71) 
Sec. 6-48. - Issuance. 
(a)  Applications for permits required by the provisions of this article shall be examined within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, no objection is found to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the application shall be approved and a permit issued for the proposed work. If examination reveals otherwise, such application shall be rejected, and the applicant notified by a written report or otherwise. 
(b)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provision of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(c)  The issuance of a permit based on applications, plans and/or specifications shall not prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said applications, plans and/or specifications or from preventing the work from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this Code of Ordinances or of other ordinances of this city. 
(d)  Each permit shall be assigned a number by the building official, and such number shall be posted plainly and conspicuously on the front of the property concerned throughout the period of work under such permit. 
(e)  Applications shall be approved or rejected not less than thirty (30) days after a complete application has been submitted. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3(106.7); Ord. No. 10-18, § 3, 11-4-2010) 
Sec. 6-49. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  All work performed under a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall conform to the approved application and plans and all codes or ordinances governing the work or equipment for which permits were issued. All work shall be performed by an individual (contractor, firm or corporation) licensed to perform such work except when performed by an individual installing, altering or repairing plumbing, plumbing fixtures, air conditioning and heating, air conditioning and heating fixtures, or electrical services in a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by him. 
(b)  Individuals, contractors, firms or corporations licensed to perform work governed by this chapter shall register their license number with the building inspector before obtaining permits. 
Sec. 6-50. - Expiration. 
A permit under which no work is commenced within six (6) months after issuance, or where the work commenced is suspended or abandoned for six (6) months, shall expire by limitation, and fees paid shall be forfeited. The application, plans, and specifications shall be reviewed and a new permit required before work is started or resumed. 
Sec. 6-51. - Revocation of permits. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation in the application or attachments thereto including plans, specifications, plot diagram, or in case any work is done contrary to the application with attachments or in case such permit was improperly issued or in case it is ascertained that the proposed work authorized under the permit does not comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 5-3(103.3)) 
Sec. 6-52. - Certificate of occupancy—Required. 
No new building shall be occupied and no change in occupancy of a building or part of a building shall be made until after the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. In addition to the above certificate of occupancy, there is also required a state certificate of occupancy for appropriate buildings in accordance with the state safety fire law. 
Sec. 6-53. - Same—Contents. 
Upon completion of a building erected in accordance with approved plans, and after the final inspection therein referred to, and upon application therefor, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 6-54. - Same—Temporary. 
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
Sec. 6-55. - Same—Existing buildings. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building inspector and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with this Code for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building inspector, two (2) sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of this chapter for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
Secs. 6-56—6-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-68. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and the city council, for the purpose of establishing stan-dards and procedures affecting the design, erection and construction of buildings and structures, the Standard Building Code, 1979 Edition, being particularly that code published by the International Building Code, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be automatically adopted and incorporated for the City of Dublin upon publication by the International Building Code 
(Code 1964, § 5-2; Ord. No. 80-22, § 1, 9-4-80; Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state minimum standards codes, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1514. 
Sec. 6-68.1. - Amendments. 
The Southern Standard Building Code, 1979 Edition, is hereby amended by deleting section 107.5 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the following new section: 
Section 107.5 Building Permit Valuations. 
The values and costs contained in the building valuation data guide and regional modifiers as listed in the Southern [Standard] Building Code will be used to determine construction cost for all buildings within the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 86-7, § 1, 3-6-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-7, § 1, enacted Mar. 6, 1986, being not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included herein as § 6-68.1, at the discretion of the editor. Said ordinance also provided that the "values" referred to in 6-68.1 "will be changed in the City of Dublin as they are changed in future editions of the Southern Building Code." 
Sec. 6-69. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "building inspector" is used in the building code, it shall mean the person designated by the mayor and city council to administer and enforce the provisions of said code. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the building code, it shall mean the city attorney. 
(c)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the building code, it shall mean the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
Sec. 6-70. - Enforcement. 
The building code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be enforced by the chief building inspector. 
Sec. 6-71. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the building code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 6-72. - Demolition, removed—Definition. 
For the purposes of sections 6-73 through 6-75, the word "structure" means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which is over eight (8) feet in width. Specifically excluded are manufactured housing, mobile homes and prefabricated buildings being moved from one location to another which are regulated by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 74-32, 9-9-74; Ord. No. 06-15, § 11, 10-19-2006) 
Sec. 6-73. - Same—Permit, bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish or relocate a building, house or similar structure without having first obtained from the city clerk a permit therefor and having paid to the clerk the required fee for the issuance of said permit. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of a permit, the holder thereof shall post a cash bond in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) with the city clerk upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The bond shall be returned to the holder upon satisfactory completion of the project. Should the project remain unfinished, kept in an unsafe manner, or should the holder fail to clear the lot of all debris and materials within the time specified on the permit, the city manager or his designated agent shall have authority to notify the holder of the permit that the city shall complete the project in a satisfactory manner at the permit holder's expense. If the expense is less than the bond posted, the remainder shall be returned to the permit holder. If the cost is greater than the bond, such difference shall be due and payable to the city, and upon authorization by the city council, shall be assessed against the property. 
(2)  Each permit holder is hereby required to post a sign at the site where any building is being demolished before commencing demolition. The sign shall be at least four (4) square feet in area, which shall read in legible printing, with letters at least six (6) inches in height: "WARNING—BUILDING BEING DEMOLISHED—KEEP OUT." Said sign shall also contain the name and business address of the permit holder in letters at least three (3) inches in height. The permit for the demolition shall be firmly affixed to said sign. The building inspector shall have the authority to inspect the projects herein specified while the work is in progress and may notify the permit holder to take such additional safety procedures as he may deem necessary. 
(3)  Upon completion of the demolition of any building under the provisions of this section and the removal of all debris, the lot shall be graded to a level consistent with the adjacent terrain. 
(Ord. No. 74-5, § 5-4, 3-4-74; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87) 
Sec. 6-74. - Same—Relocation requirements; application for permit. 
(1)  To be considered for relocation within the city limits, a structure shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The structure shall have a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet of heated space. 
(b)  The structure shall contain kitchen and bath facilities. 
(c)  The structure shall be in compliance with all city codes. 
The building inspector shall examine the structure, at the owner's expense, both prior to and after relocation. If said structure is not in compliance, the owner will be obligated to bring structure up to the minimum housing code within three (3) months after relocation. Failure to comply therewith shall be punishable under section 1-10 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  No structure shall be considered for approval to be relocated within the city limits unless the following is submitted as part of the application for the required permit: 
(a)  A picture of all sides of the structure to be moved. 
(b)  A plat prepared by a surveyor registered to practice in the state showing the dimensions of the lot, location of utilities and proposed location of the structure. 
(c)  A statement regarding the improvements proposed and existing on the lot upon which the structure is to be located. 
(d)  A single line drawing of floor plan of the proposed structure. 
(e)  A schedule for making improvements required by the building inspector to bring the structure up to the minimum housing code. 
(f)  Evidence of payment for utility disconnection and connection. 
(Ord. No. 74-32, 9-9-74; Ord. No. 86-5, § 1, 2-20-86) 
Sec. 6-74.1. - Same—Public hearing; fee. 
Before the issuance of a permit for the relocation of a structure, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing, the building inspector shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property, proposed as the new location for the structure, one (1) or more signs, each of which shall not be less than four (4) square feet in area and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed relocation and the date, the place and time of public hearing and the name and number of the city official to call for information. 
An administrative fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be charged for handling the application. Additionally, the city shall be reimbursed by the applicant for any extra cost involved, as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 77-8, § 1, 3-7-77; Ord. No. 77-18, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 86-5, § 1, 2-20-86; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87) 
Sec. 6-75. - Same—Authority of police department. 
No structure shall be placed upon appropriate trailer apparatus to be moved from any point within, or upon any street, right-of-way or highway of the city unless the following has been secured: 
(a)  A permit to be issued by the police department at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to proposed move. Said permit shall contain evidence that interested public and private utility corporations have been notified, the route to be traveled, destination and statement of person responsible for any costs and damages which may occur. 
(b)  The police department shall have the authority to specify the time and route to be traveled. 
(c)  Upon determination by the police department that additional escort services are required due to the time, route or size of structure, the city clerk, be authorized, collect a fee in advance for extra manpower required to insure the safety of the move. 
(Ord. No. 74-32, 9-9-74) 
Secs. 6-76—6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING, AND GAS CODES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-6, adopted Mar. 16, 1989, repealed former Ch. 6, Art. V, §§ 6-87—6-94 and 6-102—6-112; Art. VI, §§ 6-124—6-130 and 6-138—6-152; Art. VII, §§ 6-164—6-170; Art. VIII, §§ 6-181—6-184; and Art. IX, §§ 6-196—6-200 and 6-208—6-217; and enacted new Arts. V—X pertaining to similar subject matter to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions derived from the 1964 Code, §§ 7-4, 7-9—7-12, 7-14, 7-15, 7-17, 7-38, 7-41—7-44, 11-2—11-4, 11-10, 11-16, 11-17, 11-30—11-43, 14-1, 21-1, 21-2 and 21-21 and 21-24, and the following ordinances: 

 

Sec. 6-87. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "electrical inspector," "plumbing inspector," "heating and air conditioning inspector" or "gas inspector" is used [in the respective codes], it shall mean the person designated by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of said code. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and gas codes, it shall mean the city attorney. 
(c)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and gas codes, it shall mean the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-88. - Enforcement. 
The electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and gas codes adopted by the provisions of this article shall be enforced by the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-89. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and gas codes or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-90. - Competence of workers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any work of electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning installation, construction, or repair work unless such work is done by or under the supervision of a certificate issued by the state licensing board as required by the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or repair any work pertaining to gas construction unless such work is done by or under the supervision of a certificate issued by the city's gas fitter's examining board. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-91. - Permit application to be made by person doing work; transfer of permits. 
The application or statement for any permit required by this chapter shall be made and submitted by the contractor who proposes to do the work specified in said application. Any permit issued under the terms of this chapter cannot be transferred to any other contractor except by first making application for transfer in writing, which shall be accompanied by a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00) which is in addition to the other fees specified by this chapter. No person shall do any such work under a permit issued to any other person unless such permit has first been transferred under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-92. - Revocation of certificate of registration, permits; appeals. 
(a)  Any contractor certified by the state licensing board and holding a certificate of registration issued by the city, who violates any provisions of this chapter, or who certifies under oath to the building official that he has supervised the installation, construction or repair of any electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and gas work when in fact he has not, shall be cited by the building official to appear before said appropriate board to show cause why his certificate of registration shall not be revoked. After such citation has been personally served upon said certified contractor, he shall have the right to appear before said board and offer such evidence in his behalf as he deems necessary. At the same time the evidence shall be considered by said board. The building official shall be qualified to testify. After hearing the evidence the board shall then by a majority vote find him guilty or not guilty as the evidence warrants. If found guilty, the board may revoke his certificate of registration or impose a suspension of his certificate for a period of up to ninety (90) days. If found not guilty, the charge shall be dropped. If said person cited to appear fails to appear at the specified time and place in the citation, his certificate of registration shall automatically be suspended by the board until such time as he does appear before the board to answer such charges. 
(b)  Any person found guilty under this section shall have the right to appeal such decision to the recorder's court of the city. Such appeal shall be in writing within five (5) days after the decision of judgement appealed from. The hearing before the judge shall be de novo, and if after hearing the evidence the judge finds the board correct, the decision of the board shall be affirmed. If he finds in favor of appellant, such decision shall reverse the decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-93. - Certification required. 
No person shall do any electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning installation, constructing, or repairing within the city unless he holds a certificate from the state licensing board. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to employ another who does not hold a certificate from said board. Helpers under the direct supervision and direction of a person holding one (1) of said certificates and in his direct employment are excluded from the certificate of registration and certification requirements of this division; otherwise one who is a helper shall be included. No person shall construct, repair or make any gas installations unless he holds a competency card from the city's gas fitter's examining board and a certificate of registration issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-94. - Business certificate of registration required. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning installation; construction or repairs within the city shall obtain a certificate of registration from the city clerk therefor. Said certificate of registration shall be issued only after presentation of certificate from the state licensing board. A certificate of registration shall be issued for gas construction, installation and repairs within the city after the presentation of a competency card from the city. A certificate of registration shall not be issued unless he has taken the gas fitter's examination and issued a competency card from the city's gas superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-95. - Due date, certificate of registration; transferability. 
All certificate of registration, occupation and professional taxes set and levied by this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or commences practicing a profession subject to tax on any date after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of commencement of the business or of the business or the commencement of the practice of a profession subject to tax. The certificate of registration shall not be transferable and the full fee shall be charged for any year or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-96. - Fraudulent use of contractor's name or certificate of registration. 
No contractor shall allow his name or certificate of registration to be used by any person whether directly or indirectly for the purpose of evading this Code or the ordinances of the city. In case this section is violated, both the contractor and the person using his certificate of registration shall be deemed equally guilty and the act shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Secs. 6-97—6-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V of this chapter. 

Sec. 6-108. - Adoption of National Electrical Code. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council, for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of electrical systems and electrical materials, the National Electrical Code, 1984 edition, being particularly that code published by the National Fire Protection Association, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be adopted and incorporated for the city upon publication by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-109. - Requirements for equipment and appliances. 
No electrical materials, devices or appliances shall be sold, used or installed in the city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this article, the statutes of the state, the rules and regulations of the city, and the rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-110. - Equipment, appliances to be labeled. 
The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol, along with the label of the Board of Underwriter's Laboratory, shall be placed on all electrical equipment, devices and appliances used or installed under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any said labels. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-111. - Temporary wiring and service. 
(a)  Permission required; purposes. Temporary wiring may be installed when written permission is secured from the building official for the following purposes: 
(1)  To be used to supply power for the purpose of hoisting materials used in buildings under construction or being remodeled, and for the purpose of lighting said building or structure used in connection with the construction of such buildings. 
(2)  For the purpose of lighting tents or buildings used for religious gatherings or shows where said tents or buildings will only be used for a period of fourteen (14) days, or for decorative purposes where wiring will only be used for a period of fourteen (14) days. 
(b)  Safety required. Temporary approvals may be used covering work as outlined in this section, when such work is installed in such manner as not to endanger life or property. 
(c)  Authorized for testing or to permit use of completed installations. Temporary approvals may be issued for the purpose of allowing current to be turned on certain parts of wiring installations which are safe to the satisfaction of the building official in order to allow the testing of certain electrical equipment and in order to allow tenants, lessees or owners the use of certain completed parts of buildings before the entire job is completed. 
(d)  Duration. No temporary approval shall be issued for a period of more than ninety (90) days. If it is necessary for temporary work to remain, request for an extension of the temporary approval shall be made in writing by the person holding the permit. 
(e)  Discontinuance upon expiration. Upon expiration of temporary approval such service shall be immediately discontinued, unless approval for an extension of time is obtained from the building official. 
(f)  Contents of application. The application for temporary service shall state the period of time the service is required and the necessity for same. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-112. - Alterations in wiring or load prohibited. 
No alterations shall be made in wiring of any building or structure for light, heat, or power, or increase in the rated load as fixed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-06, adopted June 21, 2018, repealed § 6-113, which pertained to electrical board; appointment; term and derived from Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89. 
Sec. 6-114. - Permit fees. 
[Permit fees for work performed under this article shall be as follows:] 
For issuing each permit ..... $10.00 
(a)  Residential. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning values shall be based on one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per square foot. Permit cost shall be determined on two (2) per cent of the total value. 
(b)  Commercial. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning permit fees shall be based on per centages, as follows: 
(1)  Up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on two (2) per cent of the total cost. 
(2)  More than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and three-fourths (1¾) per cent of the total cost. 
(3)  More than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) but not exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and one-half (1½) per cent of the total cost. 
(4)  More than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one (1) per cent of the total cost. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, 1-3-91) 
Secs. 6-115—6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Water, § 24-34 et seq.; sewers, § 24-53 et seq. 

Sec. 6-121. - Standard Plumbing Code—Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council, for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of plumbing and plumbing materials, the Standard Plumbing Code, 1979 edition, being particularly that code published by the International Building Code, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be automatically adopted and incorporated for the city upon publication by the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-122. - Same—Amendments. 
The Standard Plumbing Code adopted by the provisions of this article is amended, altered, modified and changed in the following respects: 
Table 500. Table 500 of the plumbing code is amended as follows: 
(a)  To allow the use of schedule 40 plastic pipe for water service from the supply connection to the distribution system; and 
(b)  To allow the use of galvanized pipe except under concrete slab. 
Section 1209.1. Section 1209.1 of the plumbing code is amended as follows: that when the shutoff valve is located outside of building, a stop valve shall be required within eight (8) inches of the water meter between the meter and the building structure. 
Section 1210.1. Section 1210.1 of the plumbing code is amended as follows: 
Above ground: 
(1)  To allow the use of type L copper. 
(2)  To prohibit type M copper. 
Below ground: 
(1)  To require that only American-made type K copper may be used under concrete slab. 
Section 1301.4. Section 1301.4 of the plumbing code is amended as follows: to specify schedule 40 plastic pipe as the only type of plastic pipe allowed. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-06, adopted June 21, 2018, repealed § 6-133, which pertained to plumbing board; appointment; term, and derived from Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89. 
Sec. 6-124. - Permit fees. 
[Permit fees for work performed under this article shall be as follows:] 
For issuing each permit ..... $10.00 
(a)  Residential. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning values shall be based on one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per square foot. Permit cost shall be determined on two (2) per cent of the total value. 
(b)  Commercial. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning permit fees shall be based on per centages, as follows: 
(1)  Up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on two (2) per cent of the total cost. 
(2)  More than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and three-fourths (1¾) per cent of the total cost. 
(3)  More than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) but not exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and one-half (1½) per cent of the total cost. 
(4)  More than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one (1) per cent of the total cost. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, 1-3-91) 
Sec. 6-125. - Self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Georgia Laws, 1996, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, 7-11-96) 
Secs. 6-126—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V of this chapter. 

Sec. 6-131. - Adoption of Standard Mechanical Code. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and the city council, for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of heating and cooling systems and heating and cooling materials, the Standard Mechanical Code, 1979 edition, being particularly that code published by the International Building Code, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be automatically adopted and incorporated for the city upon publication by the International Building Code 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-132. - Permit fees. 
[Permit fees for work performed under this article shall be as follows:] 
For issuing each permit ..... $10.00 
(a)  Residential. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning values shall be based on one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per square foot. Permit cost shall be determined on two (2) per cent of the total value. 
(b)  Commercial. Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning permit fees shall be based on per centages, as follows: 
(1)  Up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on two (2) per cent of the total cost. 
(2)  More than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and three-fourths (1¾) per cent of the total cost. 
(3)  More than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) but not exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one and one-half (1½) per cent of the total cost. 
(4)  More than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the total permit fee shall be based on one (1) per cent of the total cost. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 91-1, 1-3-91) 
Sec. 6-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-06, adopted June 21, 2018, repealed § 6-133, which pertained to heating and air conditioning board; appointment; term and derived from Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89. 
Secs. 6-134—6-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GAS CODE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Gas, § 24-124 et seq. 

DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-141. - Adoption of Standard Gas Code. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and the city council, for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of gas systems and gas materials, the Standard Gas Code, 1979 edition, being particularly that code published by the International Building Code, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be automatically adopted and incorporated for the city upon publication by the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-142. - Meter connection and location. 
(a)  The piping shall be extended to the meter location designated by the distributor of gas, and a swing joint provided for connecting piping to the meter outlet. 
(b)  No gas meter shall be installed or maintained under the floor of any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-143. - Applicability to persons outside city using city gas. 
Any person having property, premises or buildings not within the corporate limits but within the gas service territory of the city, who desires or is required by law to use or connect with any gas main serving the city, shall conform to the laws and ordinances of the city regulating the installation of gas fitting, the securing of permits for, and the inspection of same, and shall abide by the gas regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-144. - Tampering with gas facilities. 
No one except the city natural gas system shall at any time turn on any valve or cock or in any way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and the meter. The user, however may turn off gas at the main jet in case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-145. - Permit fees. 
Permit fees for work performed under this article shall be as follows: 
For issuing each permit ..... $10.00 
Residential and commercial permits cost shall be determined on two (2) per cent of the total value of the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, 1-23-97) 
Secs. 6-146—6-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAS FITTERS 

Sec. 6-151. - Examining board created; membership; compensation; vote required; meetings. 
There is hereby established a gas fitter's examining board, to be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen, consisting of the gas manager, building official, one (1) member of the board of aldermen, a person engaged in and thoroughly familiar with the gas appliance installation business in the city, together with the mayor, who shall be an ex officio member and chairman thereof. No member of the board shall receive any compensation for his services. A majority vote shall be necessary to determine any decision to be rendered by the board. Meetings of the board shall be held at such times and places as specified by the chairman of the board. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-152. - Examination required; application; fee; issuance of certificate of competency. 
It shall be the duty of the gas fitter's examining board to examine and pass upon the qualifications of every person who may apply for a gas fitter's certificate of competency to do work in the city or its gas service territory, upon forms provided by the city, and who shall have paid to the city clerk an examination fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Such applicant shall be examined upon the fundamentals of gas fitting, the laws of the city pertaining to gas installation, the theory and practice of gas installation and construction, and the experience and ability of the applicant in practical gas installation. If such applicant is found to possess an accurate knowledge of the fundamentals of gas fitting, a practical working knowledge of the theory and correct practice of gas installation and construction, a thorough knowledge of the laws of the city relating to gas installation and construction, and sufficient experience and ability in gas installation and construction to safely and competently apply his knowledge in practice, the board shall issue to him a certificate of competency. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-153. - Waiting period required after failing examination. 
If any applicant fails to pass the examination required by this chapter, at least six (6) months must elapse before he will be permitted to take it again. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-154. - Certificate of competency—Duration; renewal. 
Each certificate of competency, whether original or renewal, shall be valid only for the calendar year in which issued and dated, and shall be of no force or effect in any subsequent calendar year. Any holder of an unrevoked or unsuspended certificate for any particular calendar year, whether original or renewal, shall be entitled to a renewal certificate without examination for the next succeeding calendar year upon payment of a renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the city clerk, provided such holder shall have been actively engaged in the business of gas fitting for not less than three (3) months within a period of one (1) year next preceding application for such renewal. Each duplicate certificate issued by the city clerk for one (1) lost, stolen or otherwise not in the person's possession shall cost ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-155. - Same—Not transferable. 
No gas fitter's certificate of competency under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-156. - Scope of certificate of registration provisions. 
The requirements of certificate of registration shall apply to all persons, resident or nonresident of the city, when doing work in the city. Provided, however, any person doing work outside the city in its gas service territory shall be issued a permit to do such work in lieu of a certificate of registration, upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) therefor, but in no event shall the requirements be lessened. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-157. - Permit issuance restricted. 
No permit shall be issued for such purpose of gas inspection [installation] except by [to] a gas fitter holding a certificate of competency from the city, to do such work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Secs. 6-158—6-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOUSING CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's footnote to the title of this chapter. 

Sec. 6-169. - Adoption of Standard Housing Code. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council, for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the habitability and sanitary conditions of private premises and structures, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, being particularly that code published by the International Code Council, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. All subsequent changes or edition improvements shall be automatically adopted and incorporated for the city upon publication by the International Code Council. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. 18-06, 6-21-2018) 
Sec. 6-170. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "housing inspector" is used in the housing code, it shall mean the person designated by the mayor and board of aldermen to administer and enforce the provisions of said code. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the housing code, it shall mean the city attorney. 
(c)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the housing code, it shall mean the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-171. - Enforcement. 
The housing code adopted herein shall be enforced by the chief building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Sec. 6-172. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the housing code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, 3-16-89) 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 84-51. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Authority to acquire, maintain. 
The mayor and the city council may acquire and maintain grounds in the city for use as cemeteries. 
(Code 1964, § 6-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Authority to regulate. 
The mayor and the city council of the city reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the rules, regulations, conditions and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable so to do, in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
Sec. 7-3. - Management and supervision. 
There shall be a superintendent of municipal cemeteries appointed by the city manager. It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent to look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries, and to see that no cemetery property is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and board of aldermen and to keep full and detailed accounts of all transactions involving cemetery property. 
Sec. 7-4. - Liability. 
There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers, or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding on to them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person or the family of such person who has erected any monument or marker therein, by reason of any act or acts, thing or things, omission, negligence, or otherwise related to said cemetery. 
Sec. 7-5. - Rules for interment. 
No person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until the superintendent of municipal cemeteries has determined: 
(a)  That the lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; 
(b)  That the person arranging for such burial has the right to use such lot; 
(c)  That such lot is not used beyond its capacity; 
(d)  That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and the exact location of the grave. 
Sec. 7-6. - Enclosures. 
No curbing, fencing or enclosures of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and drives if it so desires. 
Sec. 7-7. - Plantings. 
The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within a municipal cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work have been submitted to the superintendent and approved thereby. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any gravesite with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
Sec. 7-8. - Stones and monuments. 
Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
Sec. 7-9. - Trees and shrubs. 
No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down, or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walks, or lawn spaces, without the consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(Code 1964, § 6-3) 
Sec. 7-10. - Injury to monuments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure, or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery. 
(Code 1964, § 6-3) 
Sec. 7-11. - Depositing offensive matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatever. 
(Code 1964, § 6-3) 
Sec. 7-12. - Advertisements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal cemetery. 
Cross reference— Advertising generally, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 7-13. - Unauthorized interments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery unless said dead body is enclosed in a sealed concrete crypt or vault. 
(Code 1964, § 6-4; Ord. No. 80-9, 4-17-80) 
Sec. 7-14. - Visiting hours. 
Visiting hours for the general public in public cemeteries in the city are hereby established to begin at 7:00 a.m. and to end sunset each evening. 
(Ord. No. 76-4, § I, 1-26-76) 
Secs. 7-15—7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASE, CONVEYANCE OF LOTS 

Sec. 7-26. - Lot valuation. 
The city council shall consider and establish a value upon all existing, surveyed lots in the municipal cemetery and shall record such valuation on an official map plan of the cemetery, which map shall be kept on file, open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, 5-7-79; Ord. No. 86-1, 1-2-86; Ord. No. 07-03, 4-5-2007) 
Sec. 7-27. - Method of purchase. 
Any person desiring to purchase an easement in a particular lot or lots for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lot. 
Sec. 7-28. - Manner of conveying. 
Conveyance of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and city clerk and shall have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyances shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the purchaser of each burial lot an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in such lot; shall state the maximum number of graves allowed on each such burial lot as shown by the plat; and, by reference therein made, shall convey each lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance. 
Sec. 7-29. - Acceptance of provisions. 
In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid and that any such purchaser and the heirs and assigns thereof shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter, and subject to all amendments made hereto by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
Sec. 7-30. - Records of ownership. 
The superintendent shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the municipal cemeteries, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave, and the date of the burial of each. 
Sec. 7-31. - Sale or transfer by owner. 
Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and approval of the superintendent. 
Chapter 8 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City court, § 66 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; traffic, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Appeals from city court, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 6-7; municipal courts, Ch. 24-21A et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Bailiff. 
(a)  A bailiff or bailiffs of the city court may be appointed by the city judge. 
(b)  The duties of bailiffs shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, of assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of them by the judge of the court and the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 81-22, § 1, 9-3-81) 
Sec. 8-2. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the city court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Ord. No. 81-22, § 1, 9-3-81) 
Sec. 8-3. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with an offense within the jurisdiction of the city court shall receive notice by service of a summons. Such summons may be issued by the city clerk, building inspector, a city marshal or a police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the day, hour, and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the city court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Ord. No. 81-22, § 1, 9-3-81) 
Sec. 8-4. - Subpoenas. 
Upon request, the city clerk of the city court shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the city court. Subpoenas may be served in the same manner as a summons or by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 81-22, § 1, 9-3-81) 
Sec. 8-5. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for same. 
Sec. 8-6. - Arrest and bond. 
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond with a good security, for the appearance of such person before the judge of the city court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him or her in the city jail until a trial can be held, provided that the mayor, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. 
(Code 1964, §§ 24-12, 24-13) 
Charter reference— Appearance bonds, § 65. 
Sec. 8-7. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the city court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein, which date shall not be less than ten (10) days from the passage of such ruling, why they should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 24-14) 
Sec. 8-8. - Surety may surrender principal. 
Any surety upon a bail bond of any person or persons charged with a violation of a provision of this Code or city ordinance may surrender his principal at any time to the marshal or other officer on duty, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the court or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal as aforesaid shall discharge the surety or sureties of all further liability upon such bond. Provided, that such delivery shall be before any judgment of forfeiture upon said bond shall have been entered; and provided all costs which accrued in any proceeding to forfeit said bond are paid. 
(Code 1964, § 24-15) 
Sec. 8-9. - Malicious prosecution. 
Whenever the judge of the city court, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall assess the prosecution with the court costs and such punitive damages as he deems appropriate. 
Sec. 8-10. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the judge of the city court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands, or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 1964, § 24-4) 
Charter reference— Chain gang, § 125. 
Sec. 8-11. - Suspension of sentence. 
The city judge may suspend any sentence or portion of any sentence if he thinks it is to the interest of the city and for the public good. 
(Code 1964, § 24-3) 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Election of mayor and aldermen, § 42; conduct of elections, § 46. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections, Ga. Code Ann., Tit. 34A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Adoption of state rules, regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code contained in Title 34A of the Georgia Code annotated, are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in this city. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state rules, regulations, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-201. 
Sec. 9-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated by the mayor and board of aldermen annually, and from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-2, 10-20-69) 
State Law reference— Budget, appropriations required, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-201. 
Secs. 9-3—9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Voter eligibility and registration, §§ 47, 48. 

Sec. 9-16. - Registrars and deputy registrars. 
(a)  Appointment. Registrars and deputy registrars shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen, as necessary, and shall serve at the pleasure of same. One such appointee shall be designated as chief registrar, and such person shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the board of registrars and shall generally supervise and direct the administration of the affairs of said board. All appointments shall be entered on the minutes of the county meeting at which they are made. 
(b)  Qualifications. Registrars and deputy registrars shall be electors of the municipality and shall be able to read, write, and speak the English language. Such appointees, while serving as registrars or deputy registrars or within a period of six (6) months after so serving, shall not be eligible to any nomination or office to be voted for at a primary or election. 
(c)  Oath. Prior to entering upon his duties, each registrar and deputy registrar shall swear to faithfully perform his duties, such oath to be administered by an officer authorized by law to administer the oath. 
(d)  Term of office. Persons appointed to the position of registrar or deputy registrar shall serve for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Powers. The registrars and deputy registrars shall exercise those powers and duties and shall be subject to such regulations as are set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933, as amended. 
(f)  Resignation or removal. Any registrar or deputy registrar shall have the right to resign at any time by submitting a resignation to the mayor and board of aldermen. The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the right at any time to remove one or more of such registrars for cause after notice and hearing. If any registrar resigns or is removed for cause, his duties and authority as such shall terminate instanter. In the event of death, resignation, or removal of a registrar or deputy registrar, the mayor and board of aldermen shall appoint a successor who shall serve out the unexpired term. Each such appointment shall be entered on the minutes of the meeting at which the appointment is made. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-5, 10-20-69) 
Sec. 9-17. - Elector qualifications. 
Any person desiring to vote in any municipal general or special election must (1) register as an elector at least fifteen (15) days prior to the primary or election at which he desires to vote; (2) be a citizen of the state and of the United States; (3) be at least eighteen (18) years of age; and (4) be a resident of this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-4, 10-20-69) 
Sec. 9-18. - Registration lists and records. 
The city shall maintain its own registration system. The form of the registration cards shall conform to the provisions of Section 34-609 of the Georgia Code Annotated. The completed registration cards and other papers of the registrars shall be kept in the main office of the board of registrars in the city hall and shall be open to public inspection during usual business hours. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-4, 10-20-69) 
Sec. 9-19. - Challenge of registration list. 
Any elector of the municipality shall have the right to challenge the registration of any person whose name appears on the registration list in the manner set forth below. 
(a)  Appeal to registrar: Any challenge of a person's right to register shall be made in the first instance to the registrar, who shall upon hearing the evidence decide whether to affirm or reverse the original decision. 
(b)  Appeal to mayor and board of aldermen: Any person asserting a challenge under this section, or any person whose name was omitted from the registration list by the registrar, shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the registrar to the mayor and board of aldermen. If the mayor and board of aldermen should decide, after hearing the evidence of such person and that of the registrar, that the registrar erred in his decision, such body shall direct the registrar to correct the error. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-4, 10-20-69) 
State Law reference— Challenge of registration, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-520. 
Sec. 9-20. - Permanency of registration. 
Registration of an elector will remain permanent if the elector votes in at least one election every three (3) years. If such person does not vote in at least one general or special election or primary in a three (3) year period and does not specially request continuation of his registration, then the elector's name will be removed from the registration list and he shall be required to reregister in the manner provided for original registration. 
Sec. 9-21. - Absentee registration. 
Absentee registration shall not be allowed in any municipal primary or general or special election held in the city. 
Secs. 9-22—9-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 9-34. - Filing; notice of candidacy. 
Each candidate desiring to have his name placed on the ballot for an office to be filled in a municipal general or special election shall file personally, or by his agent, notice of his candidacy in the office of the municipal superintendent during the following time period: 
(a)  General election: Between the thirty-second (32nd) and twenty-second (22nd) day prior to the election. 
(b)  Special election: Between the twenty-fifth (25th) and fifteenth (15th) day prior to the election. 
Each filing shall be accompanied by the documents and information required by Section 34A-901 of the Georgia Code Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 75-18, § 1-6, 5-5-75; Ord. No. 80-24, § 1, 9-18-80) 
Sec. 9-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-21, adopted Sept. 3, 1981, repealed former § 9-35 which pertained to qualification fees and was derived from material included at the time of original codification. 
Sec. 9-36. - Campaign financing disclosure. 
All candidates for municipal public office shall keep all such records and file all such reports as are required by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act. 
Secs. 9-37—9-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING 

Sec. 9-49. - Election officials. 
(1)  Appointment: The following election officials shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen and shall receive such compensation as is provided by same: 
(a)  Municipal election superintendent. 
(b)  Chief manager. 
(c)  Two (2) assistant managers. 
(d)  Clerks, as necessary. 
(2)  Qualifications and powers: The municipal election superintendent and all poll officers shall meet such qualifications and exercise all such powers and duties as are provided in Title 34A of the Georgia Code Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-1, 10-20-69) 
Sec. 9-50. - Write-in votes. 
Write-in votes shall be permitted in municipal elections, except that no write-in votes shall be counted in a primary, runoff primary, or runoff election. 
State Law reference— Write-in votes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 2-1201a, 34A-1124. 
Sec. 9-51. - Absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections, and such use shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 34A-13 of the Georgia Code Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-9, 10-20-69) 
Sec. 9-52. - Contested elections. 
(1)  Petition of contest: Any person wishing to contest the results of a primary or election shall file a petition with the city clerk within five (5) days after the results of the election are certified to the mayor and the board of aldermen, which petition shall set forth in writing one or more of the following grounds: 
(a)  Malconduct, fraud or irregularity by any election official sufficient to change or place in doubt the result; 
(b)  Ineligibility of the defendant for the office in dispute; 
(c)  Illegal votes received, or legal votes rejected, sufficient to change or place in doubt the result; 
(d)  An error in counting the votes or in declaring the result of an election, if such error would change the result; or 
(e)  Any other cause which shows that another was the person legally elected. 
(2)  Notice and hearing: Upon the filing of the contest petition, a hearing shall be set before the mayor and board of aldermen and written notice stating the time and place of the hearing and containing a copy of the contest petition shall be given to all affected candidates. The hearing will take place not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days after service of the notice upon the affected candidates, and shall be conducted in an informal manner. 
(3)  Determination: The mayor and board of aldermen shall examine the qualifications of electors concerning their right to vote, order a recount of ballots, examine the registration lists, and perform such acts and conduct such examinations as may be deemed necessary to determine the validity of a contest of an election, except that any member of the governing authority included in the contest shall disqualify himself from judging the contest. 
(4)  Appeal: The final determination of the mayor and board of aldermen may be appealed to the superior court of the county in the manner of appeal from a court of probate, except that such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days after determination of the contest by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 69-22, § 1-10, 10-20-69) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction, Ch. 6; gas code, § 6-41, et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Using water from hydrants prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any fire hydrant for any purpose other than for the extinguishment of fires, or lawful city purposes, except with permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 8-8) 
Sec. 10-2. - Tampering, interfering with hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or interfere with any hydrant of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 8-9) 
Sec. 10-3. - Obstructing entrance to fire station. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner the entrance to any city fire station house. 
(Code 1964, § 8-10) 
Sec. 10-4. - Damaging fire equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or damage any vehicles, apparatus or other equipment of the fire department. 
(Code 1964, § 8-11) 
Sec. 10-5. - False alarms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given or to aid in the giving of any false alarm of fire with intent to deceive the fire department, or to pull the switch of any station or signal box with such intent. 
(Code 1964, § 8-12) 
Sec. 10-6. - Reward for arrest of persons making false alarms. 
The city manager is authorized to pay a reward of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the arrest, with proof to convict, of any person maliciously sending in a false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1964 § 8-13) 
Sec. 10-7. - Riding on fire trucks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except duly approved and accepted firemen to mount or ride upon any automobile, truck or other vehicle used in connection with the fire department. 
(Code 1964, § 8-14) 
Secs. 10-8—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to fix and establish fire regulations, § 1.4(21); authority to organize and operate fire-fighting agency, § 1.4(37). 

Sec. 10-19. - Composition. 
The fire department of the city shall consist of a chief and such other firemen or assistants as may be named by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 8-1) 
Sec. 10-20. - Fire chief to supervise department; reports by city manager. 
The fire chief shall have general supervision over the men and equipment of the fire department. It shall be his duty to see that all trucks, hose, and other equipment are properly cared for and preserved. It shall be the duty of the city manager to report to the mayor and board of aldermen any and all matters or things touching the fire department that should be investigated or acted on by them. 
(Code 1964, § 8-3) 
Sec. 10-21. - Chief to supervise department at fires. 
The fire chief shall have sole direction of the operation and management of the fire department at fires, subject at all times to the orders of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 8-4) 
Sec. 10-22. - Assistant chief to act in absence of chief. 
In the absence or disability of the fire chief the next highest ranking officer in the department shall perform the duties of his office. 
(Code 1964, § 8-5) 
Sec. 10-23. - Firemen to obey orders of chief, regulations of department. 
It shall be the duty of the officers and members of the fire department to obey the orders of the chief of the department, and at all times to respect and obey the rules and regulations adopted for the government of the department, under penalty of suspension or expulsion. 
(Code 1964, § 8-6) 
Sec. 10-24. - Duties of fire chief, police at fires. 
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to attend in person or send some other member of the fire department in response to every fire call in the city. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other policeman to attend all fires; to see that proper order is observed at said fires; to see that the members of the fire department are protected in the discharge of their duties; to see that all people in the vicinity of a fire are kept at a sufficient distance from the fire; to see that traffic in and around any fire or fires is properly regulated; to see that all official orders of the fire department are obeyed and to do any and every other thing that may be necessary for the safety and welfare of those attending said fire or fires. 
(Code 1964, § 8-7) 
Secs. 10-25—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 10-36. - Adopted. 
The Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1985 Edition, and any future updates, recommended by the International Building Code, and the Life Safety Code 101, 1985 Edition, and any future updates, recommended by the National Fire Prevention Association are hereby adopted, ordained and enacted and shall be in full force and effect in the city; and the same are hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this Code. Failure to observe and abide by the said codes shall be punished as provided by section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 67-30, 11-6-67; Ord. No. 88-12, 3-3-88; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
State Law reference— Any and all fire safety laws that come under the authority of the state fire marshal must be met before any building permit or occupancy permit can be issued by the city, O.C.G.A. § 25-2. 
Sec. 10-37. - Fire chief to be fire marshal, chief of bureau of fire prevention. 
The chief of the fire department, subject to approval by the state safety fire commissioner, shall be fire marshal for the city. He shall also be chief of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1964, § 8-27) 
Sec. 10-38. - Burning grass, trash. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to and burn any grass, leaves or other trash, except with written permission of the fire chief. 
(Code 1964, § 8-32; Ord. No. 88-12, 3-3-88) 
Sec. 10-39. - Fence required at bulk plants; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have or maintain within the city bulk plant or bulk tank or tanks for the storage of gasoline or other petroleum products unless such bulk plant or such tank or tanks shall be completely enclosed and surrounded by a fence not less than seven (7) feet in height, topped by not less than three (3) strands of barb wire. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to retail service stations dispensing gasoline or other petroleum products on a retail basis only, but shall apply only to wholesale dealers and distributors and agents engaged in wholesale distribution of gasoline or other petroleum products and maintaining with the city a storage plant or storage tank or tanks for such products. 
(Code 1964, § 8-31) 
Sec. 10-40. - Rules and regulations for commercial buildings. 
The following code abbreviations are used in this section: 
IBC—International Building Code. 
NFPA—National Fire Protection Association. 
SFMO—State Fire Marshal's Office. 
(a)  Construction. All buildings must be constructed according to all applicable IBC regulations, 1985 Edition, and any future updates; and the NFPA Life Safety 101 Code, 1985 Edition, or any future updates. 
(1)  All commercial buildings must be fire-resistive construction, except noncombustible construction sprinklered according to NFPA 13. 
(2)  All buildings that are occupied on a twenty-four-hour basis (hospitals, nursing homes, personal care homes, etc.) must be fire-restrictive construction and sprinklered according to NFPA 13. 
(b)  Automatic smoke detection. All buildings must have totally interconnected automatic smoke detection systems installed according to current NFPA and IBC codes. 
(c)  Manual fire alarm and communication. All buildings must have a manual fire alarm and communication system installed according to current NFPA and IBC codes. All alarm systems must be interconnected with a centrally located annunciator panel located at the main entrance of the building and visible from the outside, unless manner twenty-four (24) hours continuously. 
(d)  Automatic sprinkler protection. All buildings occupied on a twenty-four-hour basis must be totally sprinklered according to NFPA 13 and maintained accordingly. 
(e)  Stairwells. All stairwells must be a minimum two-hour separation full masonry construction and sprinklered according to NFPA codes. Exits leading to stairwells must not exceed two hundred (200) feet apart with clearly marked paths of travel and appropriate exit and emergency lights installed according to NFPA codes. 
(f)  Corridors. All corridors in commercial buildings must be thirty-minute rated from floor to roof deck of each floor. Spacing under corridors, if used for open-air space, must be a minimum two-hour rated or sprinklered. All corridors in a building occupied on a twenty-four-hour basis must be one-hour rated from floor to roof deck of each floor. Spacing under corridors must be a minimum two-hour rated and sprinklered. 
(g)  Hose cabinets, standpipes and extinguishers. Hose cabinets, standpipes (2½" NST with 1½" NST reducing caps) and fire extinguishers (minimum 2A 40 BC rated) must be located just inside a building or the corridor next to the stairwells (location to be approved by the fire chief). Hose racks are to be filled with a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of 1½-inch hose, NST, coupled with fifty (50) sections, lined (single or double jacket) 600-pound test. One-and-one-half-inch nozzle needs to be a minimum 95 GPM ¼-turn valve (recommend spinning tooth nozzle). Nozzles must be approved by the fire chief. The hose, nozzle, cabinet, standpipe and fire extinguisher must meet NFPA and IBC codes. 
(h)  Elevator shafts. In commercial buildings, elevator shafts must be two-hour separation, full masonry construction. In buildings occupied on a twenty-four hour basis (hospitals, nursing homes, personal care homes, etc.), elevator shafts must be four-hour rated, full masonry construction. 
(Ord. No. 88-12, 3-3-88; Ord. No. 96-5, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-6-2003) 
Chapter 10½ - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
ARTICLE I.  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-13, adopted Aug. 5, 2010 amended ch. 10½ in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10½, §§ 10½-1—10½-35, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 90-13, Arts. 1—6, adopted May 17, 1990. 

Sec. 10½-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3, have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of The City of Dublin, Georgia, has ordained the following. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Dublin, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-5—10½-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10½-31. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Dublin, Georgia. 
Sec. 10½-32. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Laurens County, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or those that are defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but that are not yet incorporated in an FIS including: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Dublin; or 
(2)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared using FEMA-approved methodology as approved by the City of Dublin. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is in the Office of the City Engineer, 100 Church Street, Dublin, Georgia 31021. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-34. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-36. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Dublin, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-38. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the Dublin City Code section 1-10 and section 1-11, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Dublin, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-39—10½-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 10½-61. - Designation of article administrator. 
The building inspector (hereinafter administrator) is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-62. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of article IV, subsection 10½-87(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage: 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-63. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334 and require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with article II section 10½-32, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with article III, subsection 10½-62(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with article III, subsection 10½-62(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with article III, subsection 10½-62(1)c. and article IV, subsection 10½-87(2) or subsection 10½-89(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-64—10½-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 10½-86. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-87. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10½-86(4), "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in article III, subsection 10½-63(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels; (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see subsection 10½-86(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this subsections (3)a. and (3)c. above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 10½-32, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 10½-87(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-88. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 10½-32, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with article II, section 10½-32, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions in subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10½-86(4) "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feetabove the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-89. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 10½-32, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 10½-87. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-90. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 10½-32, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10½-86(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in article III, subsections 10½-62(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-91. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM, shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Sec. 10½-92. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs.; 10½-93—10½-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10½-116. - [Procedures.] 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals (hereinafter "the board") as established by the City of Dublin, Georgia, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Laurens County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-117—10½-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10½-141. - [Defined terms.] 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
Accessory sructure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in article II, section 10½-32. 
Base flood, means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 17, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 17, 1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing, means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) (as corrected in 1929) is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 17, 1990 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 17, 1990 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 17, 1990. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) is the vertical control datum established for vertical control surveying in the United States of America. It replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundered eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. (NOTE: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.) This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-142—10½-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 10½-166. - [Severability.] 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, 8-5-2010) 
Secs. 10½-167—10½-190. - Reserved. 
Chapter 11 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-1, adopted Jan. 20, 1983, revised Ch. 11 by deleting §§ 11-1—11-6, 11-18—11-34, renumbering §§ 11-35—11-37 as 11-96—11-98, and adding §§ 11-1, 11-16—11-22, 11-33—11-40, 11-52—11-54, 11-56—11-75 and 11-88—11-95. The deleted sections were derived from Code 1964, §§ 10-1—10-13, 10-15, 10-16 and 10-18 and the following: 

 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Garbage disposal, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-5701; dumping trash, garbage, etc., on public road, on property of another, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-2612; authority to adopt, enforce sanitary regulations, § 88-112. 

ARTICLE I. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Bulk refuse container: A factory-built, leak-proof, steel or aluminum commercial bulk container for covered storage, capable of being handled as a unit by a hoist truck. 
Bulky yard and garden wastes: Large tree or shrubbery cuttings including but not limited to tree limbs and logs exceeding two (2) inches in diameter, stumps exceeding fifteen (15) inches in diameter or fifty (50) pounds in weight and palm fronds exceeding four (4) feet in length, but excluding debris for unimproved lots, soil and sod. 
Commercial establishment: Any public or private place, building and/or enterprise devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise whether nonprofit or profit-making in nature, including but not limited to, any office buildings, stores, markets, theaters, hospitals or other institutional buildings but excluding any structure which constitutes a residence as defined in this section. For the purpose of this article, "commercial establishment" shall include structures containing five (5) or more dwelling units. 
Commercial refuse: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including but not limited to, garbage, trash, paper, boxes, rubbish, yard and garden trash, ashes, street cleanings and industrial refuse emanating from a commercial establishment but excluding all body and animal excretion. 
Excavation, construction and demolition wastes: Building materials and rubble including but not limited to earth, stone, brick, flooring, lumber, plaster, roofing and any other waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of any building, pavement or other structure. 
Garbage: Any waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that accompanies the preparation, use, cooking, processing, handling or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables or any other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putre-faction and the generation of offensive and noxious gases or odors or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals. 
Hazardous waste: Waste which requires special handling, including, but not limited to explosives; pathological wastes; radioactive materials, acidic, caustic, toxic, highly flammable chemicals, solutions or substances, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, sewage sludge. 
Industrial refuse: All solid wastes which result from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as factories, processing plants, repair and cleaning establishments, refineries and rendering plants. 
Litter: All garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Recyclable material: Material which would be garbage, commercial refuse, industrial refuse or rubbish but for the fact that it is usable and has commercial value. 
Residence: A structure of no more than four (4) dwelling units designed for occupancy of more or less permanent tenure including single-family homes, garage apartments, duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes. No distinction shall be drawn between dwelling units, the occupancy of which will be based on ownership, rental, lease, cooperative venure or any other means. 
Residential refuse: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including garbage, trash, paper, rubbish and small yard and garden wastes emanating from a residence, but excluding all wastes herein defined as bulky yard and garden wastes; excavation, construction and demolition wastes; hazardous wastes; and white goods wastes; and also excluding body wastes and excretions. 
Residential refuse container: A plastic or paper bag or box or can liner of suitable thickness and strength, leakproof and spillproof, not exceeding thirty (30) gallons capacity, which can be sealed for collection and/or a water-tight, leakproof and spillproof can of galvanized steel, aluminum or plastic, having two (2) handles or a bail by which it can be lifted and a tight-fitting lid which can be sealed, not exceeding thirty (30) gallons capacity. 
Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible materials. 
Small yard and garden wastes: Grass, leaves, small tree or shrubbery cuttings incidental to the care of lawns and gardens capable of being containerized. "Scavenge" or "scavenging" shall mean unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
White goods wastes: 
(1)  Discarded appliances including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, washing machines and dryers. 
(2)  Discarded furniture including but not limited to sofas, chairs, mattresses and box springs. 
Yard and garden wastes: Grass, leaves, tree or shrubbery cuttings incident to the care of lawns and gardens. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Secs. 11-2—11-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-16. - Collection and disposal by actual producers and outside collectors. 
(a)  Responsibility for removal of construction wastes. Builders, building contractors and construction tradesmen shall be responsible for removing all excavation, construction and demolition wastes as defined in section 11-1 emanating from their work and shall use vehicles designed or outfitted so as to prevent the wastes carried therein from being blown, dropped or spilled from said vehicle. 
(b)  Transportation over city streets. The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse is produced who desire personally to collect and dispose of the same and collectors of refuse collected from outside the city desiring to haul over the streets of the city may do so provided they use vehicles designed or outfitted so as to prevent the refuse carried therein from being blown, dropped or spilled from said vehicle. Garbage shall be transported in watertight containers or in a vehicle provided with a tightfitting cover and so constructed as to prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom. 
(c)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of transporting garbage, refuse or waste through or over the streets or alleys of the city without having first secured a license therefor. 
(d)  Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons authorized under this section shall be made at approved sanitary landfill sites. 
(e)  Tree trimmers, etc. Privately employed tree trimmers, tree surgeons, landscape contractors and operators of tree and shrubbery maintenance services shall remove all limbs and tree trunks emanating from their work. 
(f)  Recyclable material. Recyclable material placed in a bulk refuse container, roll-off container or other container customarily used for garbage, commercial refuse, industrial refuse or rubbish shall become the property of the city and credit shall be given the owner or producer of same. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 97-7, 5-1-97) 
Sec. 11-17. - Prohibited disposal of garbage. 
No person shall deposit on or bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in any land, public square, street, alley, sidewalk, bridge, or other public passageway, or any storm sewer, vacant or unoccupied lot, or any lake, canal, creek or watercourse, any noxious, filthy, malodorous or offensive liquid or solid materials, garbage, refuse or rubbish, or place or keep materials, garbage, refuse or rubbish anywhere within the limits of the city in any vessel or receptacle other than in an approved residential refuse container which is collected regularly. The county public health officer may, however, approve the burial of such garbage, refuse or rubbish, such approval to be in writing and to contain conditions and restrictions with respect thereto including the place of burial. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit private, backyard, nuisance-free composting practices for home gardening purposes. No person shall burn or cause to be burned any refuse or waste anywhere within the city limits, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-17.1. - Solid waste handling facilities and recovered materials processing facilities prohibited. 
(a)  "Recovered materials"; "Recovered materials processing facility"; "Solid waste"; "Solid waste handling"; "Solid waste handling facility" are defined as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate any recovered materials processing facility or solid waste handling facility in the corporate and municipal boundaries of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute an offense and be punishable as provided in section 1-10(a). 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 2-18-16) 
Sec. 11-18. - Ownership of collected refuse and waste. 
Ownership of refuse and waste materials shall be vested in the city except for recyclable material collected by a franchisee which has agreed otherwise with its commercial customer. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 84-15, 8-16-84) 
Sec. 11-19. - Powers and duties of director of public works. 
(a)  All refuse which the city collects and disposes of shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the director of sanitation. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may, from time to time, prepare collection schedules designating days for collection of residential refuse, bulky yard and garden wastes and white goods wastes and may, at least once a year, mail to all residences in the city, a notice indicating their respective days for garbage and refuse collection. 
(c)  Where strict application of this article is impossible or would create an undue hardship, the director may, in his discretion, authorize a variance from the strict application of this article. The director of sanitation or his designated representative may enter or go upon any premises, private or public, for the purpose of making inspections for enforcing the provisions of this article, upon presentation of proper credentials in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-20. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with and abide by each provision of this article. The performance on each day of any prohibited act or practice or the failure to perform on each day any required act or practice shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  The director of sanitation or his designee may swear out a warrant for any person failing or refusing to comply with any section of this article. Such violators shall, upon convictions, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(c)  Any person guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  In accordance with section 1-10 and/or section 1-11 of this Code. 
(2)  In the sound discretion of the court, any such person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, any such person may be directed to pick up and remove from any park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-21. - Termination of waste removal service for nonpayment of bill; unpaid service charges to constitute lien against property served. 
(a)  The monthly bill for utilities sent to each utilities consumer for water and sewer service shall include a charge for waste removal service at such rates therefor as are prescribed by resolution of the city council. For premises not served by the water and sewer service, an independent monthly bill for the waste removal service shall be sent to the consumer. The total amount of each monthly bill for the utility services shall be promptly paid by the consumer in full; but if less than the full amount is received by the city, then the amount received shall be prorated among the three (3) charges in accordance with the individual amounts of each charge. Directions submitted by the consumer to apply a partial payment in a certain manner shall be disregarded. 
(b)  The waste removal service may be terminated by the city, in the discretion of the director of sanitation, from any premises for which the monthly bill for any of the three (3) utilities services, water, sewer and waste removal, remains unpaid for a period of fifty (50) days after the bill is mailed by the city. At the request of the director of public works, the director of utilities may terminate the water service as provided in Chapter 24 of this code from any premises for which the monthly bill for the waste removal service remains unpaid. When shut off for nonpayment, the water service shall not be turned on except upon full payment of the utilities service charges, plus payment of the water turn-on fee of four dollars ($4.00). 
Charges for waste removal service shall be a lien upon the premises serviced as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-22. - Procedure for termination of waste removal service for nonpayment of bill; notice and opportunity to be heard; director of sanitation authorized to adjust charges in appropriate cases. 
(a)  The waste removal service shall not be terminated by the city unless notice and an opportunity to be heard is first given to the consumer and to the owner of the property served as hereinafter set forth. The consumer shall be the person(s) to whom the monthly utilities service bills are mailed at the address(es) used by the city for such purposes. The owner shall be the person(s) shown on the county's ad valorem tax rolls as owning and paying the ad valorem property taxes on the property. 
(b)  Written notice of termination shall be mailed by regular mail to the account name and address in the name of the consumer, and to the names (s) and address(es) shown on the tax rolls in the name of the owner. In addition to the mailed notice, notice shall be posted on the premises served in a conspicuous place; and in a multiunit building such as an apartment or condominium, notices shall be posted in common areas or on interior doors for each individual unit. Where appropriate, the notice should be provided to residential consumers and owners in alternate languages. 
(c)  The notice shall advise the consumer and the owner of the termination policy of the city and shall state the grounds for termination in the present instance. The notice shall state the date on or after which termination will occur; the ser-vice(s) to be terminated; the fee to reinstate the service after termination; and, where termination is based upon failure to pay, the amount owed and time period over which the amount was incurred. 
(d)  The notice shall afford the consumer and owner a ten-day period within which to notify the director of sanitation of any complaints giving rise to the nonpayment of the waste removal service charge. The identity and manner of contacting the appropriate city official to handle the complaint shall be provided, including telephone number, business address and business hours. The appropriate public official, as designated by the director of sanitation, shall have the authority to adjust waste removal service charges in those cases where the complaints are well founded and adjustments are appropriate in the interest of justice and fairness. 
(e)  The consumer or owner shall be notified of the result of the hearing, either at its conclusion or by mail to the consumer or owner, as appropriate, to the proper address within a reasonable time after the hearing and prior to the utilities termination date. Any amounts owed the city shall be specifically stated, and any changes in city practice in affording the utilities service(s) in question giving rise to the complaint shall be specified. Thereafter, if the unpaid bills are not paid within the time specified in the original notice of termination, the director of sanitation shall be authorized to terminate the waste removal service. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Secs. 11-23—11-32. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL 

Sec. 11-33. - Exclusive collection by city. 
The city exclusively shall provide for the collection and disposal of all residential refuse, bulky yard and garden wastes and white goods wastes, except the city shall not be responsible for the collection, hauling and disposing of the residue created and left as a result of professional pulpwood cutting, professional timber cutting of any type, professional tree surgeons operation and professional tree trimmers of any type whatsoever of like residue originating from professional services on private or public property within the city. The foregoing designated personnel will dispose of their own residue immediately upon creating same. The foregoing described and stated people are hereby authorized to use the sanitary landfill being used at this time by the city for said disposal. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-34. - Mandatory service. 
Every residence within the city as defined in this article shall subscribe for residential refuse collection and disposal services from the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-35. - Collection scheduling and placement. 
(a)  Residential refuse. Residential refuse shall be collected according to a schedule established by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Bulky yard and garden wastes. 
(1)  Bulky yard and garden wastes shall be collected according to a schedule established by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Bulky yard and garden wastes shall be placed for collection in the swale or parkway immediately in front of the premises producing such wastes, but not upon the paved street or sidewalk. 
(3)  No yard or garden wastes shall be placed for collection against or within five (5) feet of any wall, fence, guy wire, vehicle or any other obstruction so as to impede collection. 
(4)  No yard or garden wastes may be placed for collection earlier than five (5) days prior to the scheduled day of collection. 
(5)  No garbage, as defined in this article, shall be placed for collection with yard or garden wastes. 
(c)  White goods wastes. 
(1)  White goods wastes shall be collected separately from all other wastes and according to a schedule established by the city manager or his designee. A reasonable fee as determined by the director of sanitation may be charged for all collection of white goods wastes. 
(2)  White goods wastes shall be collected within thirty (30) days upon request to the sanitation department and shall be placed for collection at the time and location specified by the public works department when the request for collection is made. At no time shall white goods wastes be placed for collection except as and when directed by the sanitation department. 
(d)  State of emergency. If a state of emergency has been declared by a person authorized to make such declaration, residential refuse collection shall be made in accordance with the emergency plans of the city, or as authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
(e)  Special pickups. Special pickups shall be made in accordance with this article and as determined by the director of sanitation. A reasonable fee as determined by the director of sanitation shall be charged for all special pickups. 
(f)  Newspaper waste (discarded newspapers). 
(1)  Newspaper waste may be collected according to a schedule established by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Newspaper waste may be placed in the swale or parkway at roadside for collection. In no case shall said newspaper waste be placed for collection earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled collection. All reusable containers shall be removed from the roadside on the same day collection is made. 
(3)  Newspapers shall be separately bundled by being placed in brown paper bags, cardboard boxes not exceeding fifty (50) pounds each. 
(4)  Newspaper waste shall be collected by and shall become the property of the city; and any person other than an owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, or representative of the city or a person acting on behalf of the city who picks up said newspapers and appropriates them to his own use shall be guilty of a violation of this section and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-10 or section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-36. - Preparation of residential refuse. 
(a)  Containers and bundles. Residential refuse shall be placed in containers for collection except: 
(1)  All material such as tree and shrubbery cuttings may be bundled and placed adjacent to containers for collection if the following conditions are met: Said material shall be cut to maximum four-foot lengths and each bundle shall be tied securely at each end with tape, twine or rope of such tensile strength so as to hold said bundle intact for collection purposes. Each four-foot bundle shall not be more than two (2) feet in diameter at the widest point, nor shall each bundle weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. 
(2)  Small yard and garden wastes shall be placed in a container and be placed for collection along with containerized residential refuse. 
(b)  Type containers approved. Only those residential refuse containers as defined in section 11-1 shall be used for collection purposes. 
(c)  Type containers prohibited. The following type containers shall be prohibited. 
(1)  Fifty-five-gallon metal or paper drums. 
(2)  Any refuse container not defined in section 11-1. 
(d)  Number of containers to be provided. All owners or occupants of a residence as defined in section 11-1 shall provide residential refuse containers of sufficient capacity and/or quantity to hold a five (5) days' accumulation of residential refuse. A residence exceeding four (4) dwelling units shall be served and billed as a commercial customer and may be provided with bulk refuse containers as defined in section 11-1. 
(e)  Contents of residential refuse containers. 
(1)  Hazardous wastes as defined in section 11-1 shall not be placed in residential refuse containers for collection. Substances in this class shall be disposed of as prescribed by the director of sanitation. 
(2)  Dead animals shall not be placed in residential refuse containers for regularly scheduled collections, but shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by the director of sanitation. 
(3)  Residential refuse as defined in section 11-1 shall be drained of all liquid before being placed for collection. 
(4)  No residential refuse container shall be so filled as to render impossible its closure either by: 
a.  A twine, rope or plastic tying device or other approved closure in the case of paper or plastic bags. 
b.  A tight-fitting lid in case of metal or plastic cans. 
(5)  In no case shall any residential refuse container and its contents weigh more than fifty (50) pounds when placed for collection. 
(f)  Maintenance of residential refuse containers. 
(1)  All said containers shall be maintained in good condition by the owner thereof. 
(2)  Any residential refuse container having ragged or sharp edges or holes, or being unable to support the weight of its contents, shall not be emptied by city employees. Upon notification by the director of sanitation or his designee, such defects shall be corrected or the container replaced at the expense of the owner. In the event the owner of a defective residential refuse container does not comply with the provisions, and after the passage of three (3) consecutive collection days, the container shall be deemed abandoned by its owner and shall be removed by city employees. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-37. - Preparation of yard and garden wastes. 
(a)  The amount of yard and garden wastes placed for collection shall not exceed an amount contained within an area four (4) feet wide by twelve (12) feet by six (6) feet high or seven (7) cubic yards. Piles of yard and garden wastes exceeding four (4) feet in width or exceeding twelve (12) feet shall obligate the owner or occupant to pay such special pickup fee. In no case shall leaves and grass clippings be placed in the same pile for collection with bulky yard and garden wastes. 
(b)  No more than one prescribed amount of bulky yard or garden wastes shall be placed for collection. 
(c)  In no case shall any yard and garden wastes be placed for collection within ten (10) feet of any pole connected by wires conducting electricity or guy wires connected to such pole. 
(d)  In case of leaves and pine straw the requirements enumerated in (a) and (b) of section 11-37 shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-38. - Storage and accumulation of refuse and wastes. 
(a)  Public places. No refuse or waste shall be stored in any public place at any time, except immediately prior to collection as provided in this article, and no refuse or waste shall be stored upon any private property other than that owned or occupied by the individual except with the written consent of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any accumulation of refuse on any premises in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any such existing accumulation of refuse within two (2) days after due notice thereof shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-39. - Fees. 
(a)  The city council shall from time to time consider and establish fees and service requirements for the collection and disposal of residential refuse from residences not using city water. Said fees and service requirements shall be established by resolution which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city council shall from time to time consider and establish fees and service requirements for the collection and disposal of residential refuse from residences using city water. Said fees and service requirements shall be established by resolution which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-40. - Responsibility of owners or agents for keeping areas free of garbage, trash, etc.; notice of violations. 
(a)  Generally. The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all property, whether improved or unimproved, including residential homes and apartment units, shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. The owners, agents, tenants or lessees shall be severally and jointly responsible for keeping the following areas free from garbage and refuse at all times, exclusive of those periods immediately prior to collection as permitted in this article, said areas to include the entire premises as well as the parkway or swale and/or easement adjoining the dwelling; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the owners or agents if such owners or agents shall be able and will point out to the delegated city authority any person who has caused the unsanitary or illegal condition and provided that such owner or agent or any other witness he may produce executed an affidavit to this effect and the affiant in such cases shall thus become the voluntary witness for the city in its proceedings against such person. 
(b)  Notice of violation. After issuance of warning verbally or in writing to property owners, their agents, tenants or lessees, wherever violations of this article are found, the city shall give the violators twenty-four (24) hours within which to correct the violation and shall state the penalty for failure to comply. If at the end of twenty-four (24) hours, inspection of said property reveals the violation to be continuing, then the owner, agent, lessee and/or tenant shall receive a summons requiring the aforesaid persons so responsible to appear at a stated date and time in the court of proper jurisdiction to answer charges of violation of said section. In addition, the city shall have the right to refuse to collect any residential solid waste which is placed for collection in violation of this article. However, if the city does collect said residential solid waste which was placed for collection in violation of this article then said collection shall constitute a special pickup and said owner, agent, tenant or lessee shall be charged the reasonable fee for special pickups as authorized in section 11-35 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Secs. 11-41—11-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL 

Sec. 11-52. - Means of collection. 
The city exclusively shall provide for the collection and disposal of commercial refuse within the city; however, the city may enter into a contract with any person authorized to do business in the state for the collection and disposal of commercial refuse. If commercial refuse is not stored and placed for collection as required by this article the city shall have the right of not collecting said refuse. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-53. - Mandatory service and administration. 
Every commercial establishment within the city as defined in this article shall subscribe for commercial refuse collection and disposal service from the city or a franchise of the city. All administrative operations including billing shall be performed by the city whether said collection and disposal service is performed by the city or contracted for from the city, except that services provided by a franchise shall be handled in the manner provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 84-15, 8-16-84) 
Sec. 11-53.1. - Permit to operate garbage trucks. 
(a)  Authorized. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any commercial establishment which determines that it is more economical for said commercial establishment to transport and dispose of its own commercial refuse may make application to the city for a permit to operate a garbage truck within the city for the exclusive purpose of transporting and disposing of its own commercial refuse. 
(b)  Conditions. Any commercial establishment which desires to operate a garbage truck within the city for the exclusive purpose of transporting and disposing of its own commercial refuse shall make application to the city on forms prescribed by the city manager and the director of sanitation and shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Hauling of commercial refuse shall be in a vehicle approved by the city and specifically designed for the purpose of hauling refuse. Said vehicle shall be watertight, spillproof and enclosed. 
(2)  Hauling of commercial refuse shall be exclusively for and by the commercial establishment named on the permit. 
(3)  All commercial refuse shall be disposed of at sanitary landfills certified by the department of environmental regulations. No permit shall be granted unless said application is approved by the director of sanitation and the city manager. 
(c)  Exempt from fees. Any commercial establishment which qualified for and obtains a permit to operate a garbage truck within the city for the exclusive purpose of transporting and disposing of its own commercial refuse shall be exempt from payment of the fees authorized herein for the collection of commercial refuse by the city. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Violation of any of the conditions provided in this section or violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be sufficient cause for the city to revoke the permit to operate garbage trucks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-54. - Refuse containers, contents and collection schedule. 
(a)  Refuse containers. 
(1)  Unless provided otherwise, the city shall provide appropriate bulk refuse containers to serve the volume of refuse emanating from the commercial establishment, except that a residential refuse container as defined in section 11-1 may be used for refuse collection by a commercial establishment when the volume of refuse justifies the use of said residential refuse containers. The director of sanitation shall make the determination on the type of container to be used by each customer. Appeal is solely to the city manager and the city manager's decision is final. When a residential refuse container is approved for use by the director of public works for a commercial customer, the customer shall provide the container. 
(2)  All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers as specified in this chapter so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by said establishment. 
(b)  Collection schedule and placement. 
(1)  Commercial refuse shall be collected according to a schedule established by the city manager or his designee; 
(2)  Commercial refuse shall be placed in such location that the refuse container can be easily serviced by the manpower and equipment making the collection. Commercial refuse containers shall be located on private property unless otherwise provided by the director of sanitation. 
(3)  No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that detachable containers are blocked to access by the collection truck during the hours designated for collection. 
(c)  Contents of commercial bulk refuse containers. 
(1)  Hazardous wastes as defined in section 11-1 shall not be placed in commercial bulk refuse containers for collection. Substances in this class shall be disposed of as prescribed by the director of sanitation. 
(2)  Dead animals shall not be placed in bulk refuse containers for regularly scheduled collections, but shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by the director of sanitation. 
(3)  Commercial refuse as defined in section 11-1 shall be drained of all liquid before being placed for collection. 
(4)  No bulk refuse container shall be so filled as to render impossible its closure. 
(5)  Prior to depositing cardboard boxes and cartons for collection in authorized containers or receptacles the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes or cartons. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 11-56. - Responsibility of owners or agents for keeping areas free of garbage, trash, etc.; notice of violations. 
(a)  Generally. The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all property, whether improved or unimproved, shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. The owners, agents, tenants or lessees shall be severally and jointly responsible for keeping the following areas free from garbage and refuse at all times, exclusive of those periods immediately prior to collection as permitted in this article, said areas to include the entire premises as well as the yards and one-half of the alley right-of-way, street right-of-way and/or easement adjoining such dwelling; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the owners or agents if such owners or agents shall be able and will point out to the delegated city authority any person who has caused the unsanitary or illegal condition and provided that such owner or agent or any other witness he may produce executes an affidavit to this effect and the affiant in such cases shall thus become the voluntary witness for the city in its proceedings against such person. 
(b)  Notice of violation. After issuance of warning either verbally or in writing to property owners, their agents, tenants or lessees, wherever violations of this section are found, the city shall give the violators twenty-four (24) hours, within which to correct the violation and shall state the penalty for failure to comply. If at the end of twenty-four (24) hours, inspection of said property reveals the violation to be continuing, the owner, agent, lessee and/or tenant shall receive a summons requiring the aforesaid person responsible to appear at a stated date and time in the court of proper jurisdiction to answer charges of violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-57. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley nor other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(c)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on one lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this chapter. 
(d)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in section 11-56, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other item which is either in a partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled, or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of twenty (20) days after notice of violation of this chapter, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city or its designee without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing said item or items. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(e)  Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliances, refrigerators or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building on private property and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(f)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the director, shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(g)  Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw or deposit any refuse on any public or private street or to scatter such refuse or litter on any private or public property. 
(2)  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash, or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(3)  Dump, deposit, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, deposition, placing, throwing or leaving of litter from a motor vehicle on the right-of-way of any public road or highway in the city unless: 
a.  Such right-of-way is designated by city for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper authority to use such right-of-way, or 
b.  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such right-of-way. 
(4)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said motor vehicle shall have violated this chapter. 
(h)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any street to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-58. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
In addition to the activities declared to be in violation of this chapter as set forth in section 11-57, the following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the city any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, or other literature except with the express permission of the owner or the occupant of such automobile. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, or other literature, except with the express permission of the owner of the property or intended recipient. This section shall not apply to multipage printed publications placed in mailbox or placed in a secure area of a building such as a door jam, screen door, etc. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs of any character on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, located in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-59. - Parking lots. 
(a)  All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking area. The director shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in a location until collected by the city. 
(b)  It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, scatter, or throw on any parking lot, any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. Restaurants with drive-in facilities shall install receptacles with long necks at exit points. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-60. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials, and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four (4)) or bulk containers, or detachable containers, shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-61. - Holidays. 
Collections shall not be made on the following holidays, unless otherwise specified by the director: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and other holidays as specified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-62. - Industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing said waste. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-63. - Building materials. 
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-64. - Contagious disease refuse. 
The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from home or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the Laurens County Health Department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for city collection until decontaminated. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-65. - Hypodermic instruments. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-66. - Collection and disposal. 
All persons who desire to haul refuse over roads which are a part of the city road system shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown, or spilled therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-67. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Generally. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or street. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-68. - Nuisances designated. 
Within the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him as defined by chapter 13 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-68.1. - State law adopted regulating littering and enforcement thereof. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to Georgia Code, Section 16-7-43(b) of that title known as "Dumping, depositing, etc. litter on public or private property or waters" is hereby adopted with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Enforcement. Unless expressly prohibited by other law, the enforcement provisions contained in Georgia Code, Section 16-7-45 is hereby adopted with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, §§ 1, 2, 2-20-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-7, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 20, 1985, not expressly amendatory of the Code, has been included herein as § 11-68.1, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 11-69. - Littering and noxious deposits prohibited. 
No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes or alleys or to any storm sewer, catch basin or drainage ditch, any paper, garbage or other waste matter. No person shall deposit on or bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in, any of the land, public square, street, alley, lanes, vacant or unoccupied lot, or into any lake or watercourse, any noxious filth, odors or offensive liquid, solid material within the limits of the city except in standard approved garbage receptacles from which regular collections are made. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-70. - Littering prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, tree limbs, grass cuttings, bottles or any other form of litter or waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-71. - Duty of business owners, occupants. 
The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall at all times keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials thrown or left on such premises by its customers, and to prevent the same drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-72. - Collection personnel not to enter buildings or accept money. 
Garbage and collection personnel are not permitted to enter buildings for the collection of refuse nor shall they accept any money for their services from persons served. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-73. - Bulk refuse containers. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby granted full authority to designate the number and location of detachable bulk refuse containers. 
(b)  Owners of all multifamily dwelling units containing eight (8) or more units shall be required to have detachable bulk refuse containers located on the premises of such properties for the collection of trash and garbage unless expressly relieved of this requirement by the city manager. Relief from this provision may be granted due to certain characteristics of the terrain and buildings which would make it difficult to locate bulk containers on the premises or have bulk containers serviced by service vehicles. Owners of all duplex and multifamily dwelling units shall be required to make payment of the refuse collection and disposal fee directly to the city. The fee for all multifamily units containing less than eight (8) units or other multifamily units not receiving bulk container service shall be the minimum residential rate per family units as established in section 11-39 of this article. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that detachable containers are blocked to access by the collection truck during the hours designated for collection. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
ARTICLE II. - WEED AND OTHER REFUSE REMOVAL 

Sec. 11-74. - Lands to be kept free from certain weeds. 
All lands in the city shall be kept free from weeds of a height exceeding eighteen (18) inches. The word "weeds" as used in this section shall include all rank vegetable growth which emit obnoxious or unpleasant odors or which might be a source of disease or physical distress to human beings, and the word "weed" shall also be deemed to include all high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal pools of water, trash, filth or any other deposits which may be detrimental to health. The existence of any such weeds is declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with Chapter 13 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-75. - Lands to be kept free from trash, filth, litter, etc. 
All lands in the city shall be kept free from any kind of trash, filth, or litter, including specifically but without limitation any broken tree limbs, leaves or branches, any uncontained garbage or refuse or any other type of material which might be otherwise detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. The existence of any such trash or filth is declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with Chapter 13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Secs. 11-76—11-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned property generally, § 13-19 et seq. 

Sec. 11-88. - Leaving on private property more than fifteen days; duty of owners of vehicle and premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave or permit parking or storing of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind or parts thereof, for a period of time in excess of fifteen (15) days, which is in rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, unless the same is completely enclosed within a building, or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for the same. 
(b)  The accumulation and storage of one or more of such vehicles or parts thereof, as hereinbefore defined, on private property shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of the city, and it shall be the duty of the registered owner of such vehicle or parts thereof, and it shall also be the duty of the owner of the private property, or lessee or the person in possession of private property upon which such vehicle or parts thereof is located, to remove the same from the city, or to have the same housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-89. - Notice to owner of vehicle or land to remove vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to give written notice to the registered owner of any motor vehicle or parts thereof which is in violation of this article, or to give such notice to the owner or lessee of private land on which such motor vehicle or parts thereof is situated, giving notice that such vehicle or parts thereof violates this article, and demanding that such motor vehicle or parts thereof be removed from the city within fifteen (15) days or that within fifteen (15) days the same be housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street. Such notice may be given by personal service, or by certified mail, with a return receipt requested. 
(b)  Written notice required by this section shall be deemed to have been given, i.e., constructive notice, when the registered owner of the motor vehicle or parts thereof, or the owner, lessee or other person in possession of private property concerned herein, either; 
(1)  Refuses to accept the prepaid United States mail certified letter from the city and same is returned from the post office marked "refused"; or 
(2)  Such person to be notified is present in the city but the notification letter is returned marked "unclaimed" by the post office, in which event notice by the city may be made by affixing the letter in a conspicuous place at the main entrance or to the front door of the residence of such person. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-90. - Public notice when owners cannot be found. 
(a)  After diligent search and inquiry by the city manager or his designee, no written notice as above shall be required where the registered owner of such vehicle or parts thereof or the owner of the private property or lessee or other person in possession of private property upon which such vehicle or parts thereof is located cannot be found or determined, but instead a public notice shall be posted by the city clerk on the city hall bulletin board for five (5) consecutive days. 
(b)  Such public notice shall include among other information, "Public Notice; To Whom It May Concern," date, legal description of the situs, address of same, a full description of the motor vehicle or parts thereof; when available, the last known owner of the vehicle or owner of the realty or both or the last known person in possession of the situs, and the date from or approximate period of time during which such nuisance has existed. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-91. - Removal of vehicle by city; costs of removal. 
In the event that any of the persons described in subsection 11-88(b), whether an individual, firm or corporation, fail, neglect or refuse to remove the abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or parts thereof, the city or its agent or contractor may remove the abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or parts thereof at a cost not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and a minimum cost of five dollars ($5.00), as determined by the city; which cost, if in the best interests of the city, as determined by the city manager, may be collected from the registered owner of such vehicle or parts thereof or the owner of the private property or lessee or other person in possession of private property upon which such vehicle or parts thereof is located. Ownership of any vehicle or parts thereof removed by the city, its agent or contractor shall, upon such removal, be vested in the city, its agent or contractor, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-92. - Penalty; execution of sales agreement in lieu of costs or penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 11-88 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in sections 1-10 and 1-11 provided that, if the person receiving the notice provided for in section 11-89 or section 11-90 executes a sales agreement in a form similar to that below, the city, its agent or contractor will remove the vehicle or parts thereof at no cost to the person receiving such notice, and no warrant for arrest will be issued. 
Sales Agreement
KNOW ALL MEN by these presents, that in consideration of an offer by the City of Dublin, Georgia, or its agent or contractor _______ whose address is _______ to remove at either no cost to the undersigned or at a cost of $_______ (dollars) to the undersigned the hereinafter described abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or parts thereof from certain premises in the City, the undersigned warrants (that he is the owner of the vehicle) (that he is the owner or occupant of the property where the vehicle is located), and hereby grants, bargains, sells, transfers and delivers unto the City of Dublin or its agents the following described abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or parts thereof: 
_____ _____ Location _____ Dated this _____ day of _______, 19___.  Witnesses: 
_____ Owner-Seller-Occupant 
Residence: _____ _____ 
Phone No.: _____ 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-93. - Authority of city manager to contract. 
The city manager is authorized to enter into a written agreement with a duly licensed junk dealer for the removal of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof under this article, wherein the consideration for the services of such junk dealer shall be the vehicle or parts thereof at no expense to the city. Such junk dealer, before entering into contract with the city or being appointed its agent or contractor in reference to sections 11-91 and 11-92 shall furnish evidence of public liability insurance to adequately protect such agent or contractor and the city, deemed reasonable in the opinion of the city manager. In the event a qualified and suitable junk dealer is not available to contract with or act as the city's agent or contractor, as provided herein, the city manager is authorized to contract with the lowest responsible bidder to provide for the removal from private property of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof under section 11-91. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-94. - Powers and duties of director of sanitation. 
The powers and duties of the director of sanitation shall be to enforce the provisions of this article and for such purpose the director shall have all the power of a police officer of the city. He or his designated representative may enter any building or upon any premises, private or public, for the purpose of making inspection, upon presentation of proper credentials in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Sec. 11-95. - Effect on other laws. 
This article shall not affect section 13-22 of this Code but shall be deemed to be in addition thereto. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
ARTICLE IV. - FEES 

Sec. 11-96. - Waiver and limitation for certain residential users. 
(a)  The sanitation use fee for residential premises shall be waived upon proper notification to the city clerk that all of the following conditions are existing: 
(1)  No type of business or service is provided at the residence. 
(2)  Head of household is aged sixty-two (62) years or more. 
(3)  Income of head of household from all sources is under five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year. 
(4)  Assets besides residence are under five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(5)  No other resident is making any income. 
(6)  No tenants live in the residence. 
(7)  It is not a public housing or subsidized housing unit. 
(8)  Regulation garbage containers are used. 
(b)  The sanitation use fee for residential premises shall be five dollars ($5.00) per household upon proper notification to the city clerk that all of the following conditions are existing: 
(1)  No type of business or service is provided at the residence. 
(2)  Head of household is aged sixty-two (62) years or more. 
(3)  Only one person in household and income from all sources is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year, or only two (2) persons in household and income from all sources is more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) but less than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year. 
(4)  Assets besides residence are under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(5)  No tenants live in the residence. 
(6)  It is not a public housing or subsidized housing unit. 
(7)  Regulation garbage containers are used. 
(c)  It should be incumbent upon the city clerk to establish the means to certify the conditions set forth above. The city clerk shall reexamine the qualifications of each household for waiver of the sanitation fee from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 75-23, § 10-13; 1-7-75; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 87-25, 9-3-87; Ord. No. 90-22, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 92-1, 2-20-92; Ord. No. 95-4, 2-16-95) 
Sec. 11-97. - Obligation for payment of fees. 
The failure of any person to accept or take advantage of the services of the sanitation department in removing garbage shall not relieve such person of the obligation to pay such fees unless authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen; provided however, no fees shall be assessed or charged by the city to a commercial establishment for commercial collection service from a franchisee of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 10-15; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 84-15, 8-16-84) 
Sec. 11-98. - Due date of fees; penalties for nonpayment. 
All bills for garbage collection service shall be due and payable at the office of the city clerk on the first day of each month, and if said bills are not paid by the tenth of the month a ten (10) per cent delinquency penalty shall be added. If said bills are not paid by the twentieth of the month, garbage collection and water service shall be discontinued without further notice. Provided, however, that when the first, tenth, or twentieth of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, said bills shall become due, said penalty shall attach or said service shall be discontinued on the next succeeding business day after the first, tenth or twentieth. 
(Code 1964, § 10-15; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-20-83) 
Chapter 11½ - IMPACT FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11½-1—11½-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND WASTEWATER 

Sec. 11½-26. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Dublin Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Ordinance". 
(b)  The city has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to the "Home Rule" provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Title 36, Chapter 71 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). This article is constructed in accordance the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (DIFA); (O.C.G.A. § 36-71). 
(c)  This article shall apply to all land receiving water and/or wastewater treatment services from the city, incorporated and unincorporated land alike. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 1, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-27. - Intent and purposes. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the city's comprehensive land use plan adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 70, and pursuant to the standards and procedures established by state agencies where applicable. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of water and wastewater treatment system improvements necessary to provide water and wastewater treatment capacity needed to serve new development in Dublin and the surrounding areas. It is specifically acknowledged that this article has approached the problem of determining said proportionate share in a conservative and reasonable manner, in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 71. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 2, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-28. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text of this article shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the text clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or", or "either…or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly but not in combination. 
c.  "Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(8)  Any water or wastewater facility, easement or right-of-way used to define water and wastewater impact fee district boundaries may be considered within any district it bounds for the purpose of the assessment and utilization of these fees. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 3, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-29. - Definitions. 
Building permit means the document issued by the City of Dublin authorizing the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure, or authorizing the installation of a manufactured home or recreational vehicle. For the purpose of this article, a building permit also means a "change of use permit". 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years of more. 
Capital improvement program means that portion of the city comprehensive land use plan which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
City means Dublin, Georgia, but may also be interchangeable with the city council, as the context requires. 
Comprehensive plan means the city comprehensive land use plan. 
Developer means any individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other similar entity who engages in development activity. 
Development activity means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, any change in the use of a building or structure, additional plumbing fixtures to a building, additional water and/or wastewater treatment services provided to a building, or any change in the use of land requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
Director means the city engineer and/or the officials designated to administer the various provisions of this article. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract, resolution or otherwise commit to use by appropriation by an official act of the city. 
Facility expansion fee district means a geographic area identified by the city in which a defined water and/or wastewater facility is provided. 
Fee payor means that person who pays an impact fee or his successor in interest with the right of entitlement to any refund of a previously paid impact fee which is required by this article and which has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an expressed transfer or assignment of the right of entitlement to any refund of previously paid impact fees, the right of entitlement shall be deemed to "run with the land". 
Individual fee calculation study means a water and/or wastewater demand engineering and/or economic report or documentation prepared by a fee payor to allow determination of the impact fee other than by use of the fee schedule established by the city. 
Individual fee determination means the impact fee determined by the director on the basis of an individual fee calculation study. 
Level of service is a qualitative measure of water consumption and/or wastewater discharged that varies by meter size, land use, gallon, equivalent residential unit or fixture unit, but is based on the level of water and/or wastewater treatment facilities needed to accommodate the demand of all land uses consistent with state and federal regulations and prudent engineering practices. 
Methodology report means a report prepared which provides an analysis and methodology for the determination of the water and wastewater impact fee and the impact of development activity on the needs and cost of additional water and/or wastewater treatment facilities. 
Present value means the discounted cash flow of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money; also may be stated as "current value". 
Project or development project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Project improvement means a site improvement and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control the determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: 
(1)  Water production, treatment, and distribution facilities; 
(2)  Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities; 
(3)  Roads, streets, bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any components of state or federal highways; 
(4)  Storm water collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement and improvements; 
(5)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
(6)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; and 
(7)  Libraries and related facilities. 
Replacement value means the cost of replacing a water and/or wastewater treatment facility at current market prices. 
System improvement means water and/or wastewater treatment facilities which are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to a project improvement. 
System improvement cost means cost incurred to provide additional water and/or wastewater treatment capacity needed to serve development or new connections within the service area of the city, including, but not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition cost, court cost, attorney and expert witness fees, and expenses for qualified staff, engineer, planner, architect or financial consultant for preparing or updating the city's capital improvement program. System improvement cost shall also include interest charges and other finance costs related to the issuance of bonds, notes or other financial obligations incurred by the city to finance capital improvements. 
Water and/or wastewater treatment facility means any water production; transmission or distribution facility, any wastewater treatment, collection or transmission facility, and any other support facility required for water and/or wastewater systems operations. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 4, 9-16-2004; Ord. No. 06-15, § 8, 10-19-2006) 
Sec. 11½-30. - Imposition of water and/or wastewater impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development activity generating water and/or wastewater treatment demand shall pay a water and/or wastewater impact fee in the manner set forth in this article. 
(b)  No building permit for any development activity generating water and/or wastewater treatment demand and thereby required to pay a water and/or wastewater impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued by the city unless the required water and/or wastewater impact fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 5, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-31. - Computation of water and/or wastewater impact fee. 
(a)  (1)  At the option of the developer, the amount of the water and/or wastewater impact fee may be determined from the fee schedule established by the city, and maintained in the office of the city clerk, or; 
(2)  If a building permit is requested for a building with mixed uses, the water and/or wastewater impact fee shall be determined according to the fee schedule established by the city by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule. If the type of development activity for which a building permit is applied for is not specified on the water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule, the director shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type of development activity by the reports and studies done by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State of Georgia, and/or the city department of public works, and/or professional organizations such as the American Water Works Association, the Water Environment Federation, or the American Society of Civil Engineers. If the director determines the fee by using water and/or wastewater demands/generation statistics from the above-named sources and applying the formula set fourth in subsection (b) below, the director shall be guided in this determination by the above-named sources. In cases of change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use that requires the issuance of a building permit, the water and/or wastewater impact fee shall be based on the net increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
(b)  If a developer shall elect not to have the water and/or wastewater impact fee determined according to subsection (a) above, then the developer may apply for an individual fee determination. A developer applying for an individual fee determination shall prepare and submit to the director an individual fee calculation study for the development activity for which the building permit is sought. The individual fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for the study established by the director, or, subject to the prior approval of the director, such other professionally accepted methodology that identifies the project's proportionate share. The developer shall attend a pre-application meeting with the director and no agreement or understanding in regard to data assumptions, or methodology shall be binding upon the city unless provided to the developer in writing. The water and/or wastewater treatment demand engineering documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the individual fee calculation was made, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Water and/or wastewater treatment demand engineering studies including documentation of water and/or wastewater treatment demand rate appropriate for the development activity; 
(2)  Cost documentation studies including documentation of the cost per unit of impact for water and/or wastewater treatment construction and documentation credits attributable to the development activity which can be expected to be available to replace the portion of the service volume used by the water and/or wastewater treatment demand generated by the development activity. 
This documentation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals in their respective fields and shall follow best professional practices and methodologies. The following formula, as explained in the methodology report, shall be used by the director to determine the water and/or wastewater impact fee per unit of development based on the type of land use: 
{(Unit Cost × Demand) — Credit =  Proportionate Share} 
Whereby: 
Unit Cost = The average cost per gallon of capacity to provide water and/or wastewater treatment system facilities within the service district. 
Demand = The average volume/capacity of water and/or wastewater expected to be consumed by a given land use or development activity on a daily basis. 
Credit = The average present value of future payments by a land use towards the retirement of debt incurred to construct water and/or wastewater facilities. 
The director shall provide the developer with a written individual fee determination within thirty (30) days after the presentation of the individual fee calculation study. 
(c)  (1)  Upon application to the director, any person engaging in development activity requiring payment of a water and/or wastewater impact fee may apply for and shall receive from the director a certification of the application of the water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule to a particular development activity proposal or a certification of an individual fee determination for a particular development proposal. 
(2)  Applications for certification shall include the following informational items: 
a.  A full and complete description of the project; 
b.  A full and complete description of the proposed land use and the particular proposed development activity; 
c.  A statement as to whether the applicant seeks a certification of the water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule as applied to that particular development proposal of a certification of an individual fee determination; and 
d.  If the applicant seeks a certification of an individual fee determination, and individual fee calculation study complying with the requirements complying with the requirements of subsection (b). 
(3)  The director shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the application of the water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule to a particular proposed development activity within five (5) days after the director's receipt of a completed application. The written certification of the director shall establish the water and/or wastewater impact fee for a particular proposed development activity for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of certification. The director shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the director shall establish the water and/or wastewater impact fee for the one hundred eighty-day period immediately following the date of such certification. Notwithstanding the issuance of any such certification, any changes in or additions to the proposed development activity different from the particular proposed development activity identified in the original application shall be subject to increased or additional water and/or wastewater impact fees to the extent that such changes or additions require capital improvements or facility expansions. The additional water and/or wastewater impact fees shall be based upon the most current water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule in effect on the date of the issuance of a building permit. 
Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition of final inspection, the developer shall re-certify in writing to the director the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage attributable to each use. In the event that the actual use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the water and/or wastewater impact fee has been previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition of final inspection. The amount of the excess shall be based upon the most current water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule in effect on the date of final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 6, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-32. - Payment of water and/or wastewater impact fees. 
(a)  Any person required to pay a water and/or wastewater impact fee pursuant to this article shall pay such fees to the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  All funds collected pursuant to this article shall be identified by the water and/or wastewater impact fee district from which it was collected and promptly transferred for deposit into the appropriate water and/or wastewater impact fee account to be held and accounted for separately as provided in section 11½-38 of this article. Funds shall be used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(c)  In lieu of all or part of the water and/or wastewater impact fee, the city may accept an offer to provide the items and/or services specified in subsection 11½-34(2) of this article. Any such offer must comply with the requirements of section 11½-34 of this article. The portion of the fee represented by the water and/or wastewater treatment improvements shall be deemed paid when the construction is completed and accepted by the city for maintenance or when the person claiming such credit posts security for the cost of construction as provided in subsection 11½-34(2)e. of this article. That portion of the fee represented by land dedication shall be deemed paid when the title to said land has been accepted by the city. Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the city may issue a building permit prior to accepting title to land if the refusal to issue the permit will result in an exceptional hardship to the developer and the city is otherwise reasonably assured that title will be conveyed and accepted within a reasonable thereafter. For the purposes of this subsection, an exceptional hardship shall not include a hardship solely created by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 7, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-33. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected as water and/or wastewater impact fees shall be used for system improvements. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance or for any purpose not in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Water and/or wastewater impact fees shall be used exclusively for system improvements in the water and/or wastewater impact fee district in which the project for which the fees were paid in located. 
(c)  Funds shall be construed as being expended in the order in which they were collected. 
(d)  Water and/or wastewater impact fees may be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance the expansion of water and/or wastewater treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 8, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-34. - Credits. 
Credits against water and/or wastewater impact fees shall be given as follows: 
(1)  No credit shall be given for project improvements. 
(2)  Credit shall be given for the present value of the construction of improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money by a developer subsequent to the effective date of this article and required or accepted by the city from the developer or his/her predecessor in title for system improvements. 
a.  A person claiming credits shall submit to the director a project description in sufficient detail to allow the director to prepare an engineering and construction cost estimate. A person proposing credit for water and/or wastewater treatment improvements shall present cost estimates and property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals to be used by the director in determining the amount of credit. All construction must be carried out in accordance with applicable city or state development and design standards. A person proposing credits for land dedication shall present the director with property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals and a certified copy of the most recent assessment of the property for tax purposes to be used by the director in determining the amount of credit. However, the director retains the right to determine the amount to be credited by preparing engineering and construction cost estimates and/or property appraisals for those improvements and/or property dedications. 
b.  Credits must be claimed at the time of the application for a building permit. Any credit not so claimed shall be deemed invalid. 
c.  In the event a developer contracts with the city to construct, fund or contribute system improvements so that the amount of the credit created by such construction, funding, or contribution is in excess of the water and/or wastewater impact fee which would have been otherwise due and owing, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess contribution, funding, or contribution from water and/or wastewater impact fees paid by the development projects located in the water and/or wastewater impact fee district which has benefited by such improvements. The terms and conditions for any such reimbursement agreement under this section shall be negotiated individually, on a case-by-case basis, when the execution of such agreement(s) are deemed in the best interest of the city to enter into such agreement(s). In no case shall the amount credited to the developer shall exceed the construction cost paid by the developer. 
d.  In the event a building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of any water and/or wastewater impact fees for the same parcel of land paid upon issuance of such building permit. A building permit shall be deemed abandoned if no construction has commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit. 
e.  Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow agreement shall be posted with the city, made payable to the city in the amount approved by the director equal to one hundred ten (110) per cent of the full cost of the construction of such water and/or wastewater treatment improvements. If a water and/or wastewater treatment construction project will not be constructed within one (1) year of the acceptance of the offer by the city, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) per cent compounded, for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be renewed and approved by the city attorney's office prior to the acceptance of the security by the city. 
(3)  Credits are transferable from one developer to another and from one project to another provided such credits may not be transferred to a project in a different water and/or wastewater impact fee district. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 9, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempted from payment of water and/or wastewater impact fees: 
(1)  Alteration or expansion of an existing building or use of land where no additional living units are created, where the use is not changed, and whereby no additional water consumption and/or wastewater treatment capacity demands will be created over and above those demand produced by the existing use. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures that will not produce additional water consumption and/or wastewater treatment capacity demands over and above those produced by the principal building or the current use of the land. 
(3)  The replacement of a building, manufactured home, or structure that was in place on the effective date of this ordinance, or the replacement of building, manufactured home, or structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which appropriated water and/or wastewater impact fee had been paid or otherwise provided for, with a new building, manufactured home, or structure of the same use, provided that no additional water consumption and/or wastewater treatment capacity demands will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land. 
(b)  A person claiming exemption(s) pursuant to subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) above shall submit to the director information and documentation sufficient to permit the director to determine whether such exemption claimed is proper, and, if so, the extent of such exemption. 
(c)  Exemptions must be applied for at the time of the application for a building permit. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
(d)  The mayor and city council, by majority vote may wave any and all provisions of this article when the waiver of said provisions are deemed in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 10, 9-16-2004; Ord. No. 06-15, § 9, 10-19-2006) 
Sec. 11½-36. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application to the director by the fee payor, the city shall refund ninety seven (97) per cent of the water and/or wastewater impact fee paid if capacity is available and the building permit is rescinded or in the event water and/or wastewater treatment service is denied. The city shall retain three (3) per cent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. 
(b)  (1)  Upon application to the director by the fee payor, the city shall refund ninety seven (97) per cent of the water and/or wastewater impact fee paid and not expended or encumbered if the city, if after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to encumber the fee or commence construction within six (6) years from the date the water and/or wastewater impact fee was paid. The city shall retain three (3) per cent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. In determining whether water and/or wastewater impact fees have been expended or encumbered, all fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(2)  When the right to a refund exist due to the city's failure to encumber water and/or wastewater impact fees, the city shall provide written notice of entitlement of a refund to the fee payor who paid the water and/or wastewater impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval, or to the fee payor's successor in interest who has given the city notice of the transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided the city with a mailing address. The city shall publish notice within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the six-year period from the water and/or wastewater impact fee payment date. Such published notice shall contain the heading "Notice of Entitlement to Water and/or Wastewater Impact Fee Refund". 
(c)  A refund application shall be made to the director within one (1) year from the date such refund becomes payable under subsections (a) and (b) above or within one (1) year from the date of the publication of the notice of entitlement a refund under subsection (b) above, whichever is later. Any refund not applied for within said time period shall be deemed waived. 
(d)  A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the director to determine whether the refund claimed is proper and, if so, the amount of such refund. 
(e)  A refund shall include a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess water and/or wastewater impact fee. 
(f)  All refunds shall be paid within sixty (60) days after the director determines that such refund is due. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 11, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-37. - Water and/or wastewater impact fee districts established. 
Within the effective date of this article there is hereby established an initial water and/or wastewater impact fee district which shall be conterminous with the present and future water and wastewater treatment service area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 12, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-38. - Water and/or wastewater impact fee account established. 
(a)  With the effective date of this ordinance there is hereby established a water and/or wastewater impact fee account for the initial water and/or wastewater impact fee district established in section 11½-37. Such account shall be interest bearing. All water and/or wastewater impact fees collected shall be deposited into this account. 
(b)  Interest earned on funds shall be funds of the account on which it is earned and is subject to all restrictions imposed by section 11½-33 of this article. 
(c)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be in accordance with section 11½-33 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 13, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-39. - Development impact fee advisory committee. 
Prior to the adoption of this ordinance, a development impact fee advisory committee shall be established. 
Such committee shall be comprised of not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) members appointed by the mayor and city council. At least forty (40) per cent of the membership shall be representatives from the development, building, or real estate industries. 
The development impact fee advisory committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to assist the mayor and city council with the regard to the adoption of this development impact fee ordinance. In that this committee serves in an advisory capacity, no action of the committee shall be construed as binding or a prerequisite for action by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 14, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-40. - Review of fee schedule. 
The water and/or wastewater impact fee schedule shall be reviewed by the mayor and city council at least annually; provided, however, the failure to review such fee structure shall not invalidate this article. Following such review, if changes in the fee schedule are deemed necessary, said changes may be implemented administratively, without formal amendment to this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 15, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-41. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Any person directly aggrieved by a decision of the director with respect to any of the following determinations shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and city council: 
(1)  The imposition of a water and/or wastewater impact fee; 
(2)  The amount of a water and/or wastewater impact fee; 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits to a water and/or wastewater impact fee; 
(4)  The entitlements to an exemption from a water and/or wastewater impact fee; 
(5)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of a water and/or wastewater impact fee. 
Prior to any appeal to the mayor and city council, the aggrieved party shall file a written request for reconsideration with the director, who shall act upon the request within fifteen (15) days following the receipt of said request. 
(b)  All appeals shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of the director's decision on the request for reconsideration by filing with the director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefore. The director shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. The mayor and city council shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable period of time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present testimony and evidence and may be represented by legal council. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and city council may pursue the appeal to the Superior Court of Laurens County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the mayor and city council is rendered. 
(c)  A developer may pay a water and/or wastewater impact fee under protest in order to obtain a building permit, and by making such payment shall not be prohibited from: 
(1)  Exercising the right of appeal provided in this section, or 
(2)  Receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 16, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 11½-42. - Penalty and enforcement provisions. 
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to the laws of the State of Georgia; however, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue for relief in civil court to enforce the provisions of this article. Knowingly furnishing false information to the director on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § 17, 9-16-2004) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-29, adopted Dec. 17, 1981, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been codified, at the editor's discretion, as superseding former §§ 12-2—12-19, 12-22, and 12-23, which pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1964, §§ 15-1—15-15; and Ord. No. 76-1, §§ 1—18, adopted Jan. 5, 1976. 
Charter reference— Authority to license businesses, occupations, etc., § 11(j); occupational licenses generally, § 98. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; alcoholic beverages licenses and permits, § 4-2 et seq.; ambulance licenses, § 4½-1; dog licenses, § 5-37; business certificates of registration for electrical, plumbing, heating, etc., §§ 6-94 et seq.; peddlers permit, § 16-20 et seq.; precious metals, § 17½-1 et seq.; occupation tax, § 21-46 et seq.; taxicab business licenses, § 22-23 et seq.; taxicab drivers permit, § 22-36 et seq.; junkyards prohibited in city limits, app. A, § 5.12.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Application of chapter. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to and shall govern the issuance of any license or permit required by any other chapter or provision of this Code of Ordinances or city ordinance. 
Sec. 12-2. - Businesses to be registered. 
From and after passage and adoption of this article, every person, firm, corporation or association that exercises or engages in or pursues within the corporate limits of the city and profession, trade, calling or business of any nature whatsoever, shall register in the books kept for that purpose by the clerk of the city council of the said city, their name, profession, trade, calling or business of any and every nature and the address of their place of business, if any, within said city. 
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-3. - Engaging in business without license declared unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to do or engage in either or any of the following described businesses, trades, professions or callings in the said city during the year without first procuring a license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 18, 12-17-81) 
Editor's note— The enumeration of licenses and fees, as referred to in the above section, has not been included herein, but a copy may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-4. - Registration of new businesses. 
Any and all persons, firms, corporations or associations, commencing any business of any kind whatsoever in the said city after the first day of January shall register their name and business as provided herein and pay the license prescribed herein immediately upon commencing business, trade, profession or calling. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 2, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-5. - License required if business advertised. 
Any persons, firm, corporation or association advertising by signs, card, circulars, newspaper advertising, radio advertising or otherwise, that he or she or they are in business of any kind in said city shall be held liable for the license required of such business. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 4, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-6. - Responsibility of agents. 
If any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in business in said city by or through an agent or agents other than the agent or agents in charge of said business shall become liable for the license upon the business in which he or they are engaged and it shall be unlawful for any such agent or agents to engage in any business, vocation or occupation, or to do any act in this city for which a license is required, without first obtaining a license to engage in such business. By this section it is made the duty of the agent or agents to ensure that the principal pays the required license. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 16, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-7. - Tax on itinerant traders not otherwise mentioned. 
There shall be levied and imposed such license as the mayor and city council shall deem just and equitable upon all itinerant traders and/or agents not specifically mentioned elsewhere in the tax and license article. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 9, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-8. - Fee if no fixed place of business in city. 
Any person or persons having no fixed place of business within the corporate limits of said city, but exercising therein any business of a kind or nature requiring registration under this article, shall be subject to and shall pay, a like taxation or license fee as those following a similar business in said city and having a fixed place of business. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 3, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-9. - Oath required. 
Every person applying for a business license shall make oath that the business engaged in by the applicant falls within the class for the license applied for and to which the ordinance prescribing the license tax specifically applies. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 8, 12-17-81) 
Editor's note— The enumeration of licenses, as mentioned in the above section, has not been set out herein, but a copy may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-10. - Business "in connection with other businesses." 
No license shall be issued or granted to any person, firm corporation, or association or agent to do or engage in any business of any kind or nature in the said city "in connection with other business," unless the amount of license for such other business shall be equal to or exceed the amount of license as applied for "in connection with other business." When the amount of any given or stated license is prescribed or fixed, and it is then provided that a lower license for the same business may be applicable when issued "in connection with other business" the lower amount of license is not and shall not be applicable, nor shall any person be entitled to the benefit of same, unless it is issued in connection with other business which required a license equal to or in excess of the higher license applicable; that is, the license for such business if the same were not in connection with other business. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 17, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-11. - Scope of licenses. 
The licenses hereinafter enumerated and levied and imposed upon each separate business and upon each separate place of business apply to only that particular business and that particular place of business, and do not include any other business or place of business for which a special license or tax is required. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 8, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-12. - Issuance; due date for payment of tax; expiration. 
All licenses issued by the city shall be in the name of the person, firm, corporation, association or agent to whom the same is issued, and each license tax levied by this article shall be registered, license tax due and payable not later than the first day of January, except as otherwise especially provided, and a license issued hereunder shall expire on the thirty-first day of December. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 5, 12-17-81) 
Cross reference— Due dates for full payment of special taxes, § 12-13. 
Sec. 12-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-6, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed § 12-13. Formerly, § 12-13 pertained to due dates for payment of special taxes and derived from Ord. No. 81-29, § 10, adopted Dec. 17, 1981. For provisions re due dates for occupational and professional taxes, the user's attention is directed to § 21-50 herein. 
Sec. 12-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-6, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed § 12-14. Formerly, § 12-14 pertained to penalty for late payment of license fees and derived from Ord. No. 81-29, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1981. For provisions re penalties and interest on delinquent occupational or professional taxes, the user's attention is directed to §§ 21-54 and 21-55 herein. 
Sec. 12-15. - Proration. 
No license herein provided for shall be prorated except by special permission of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 13, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-16. - Posting required. 
Each license shall be posted conspicuously at or in the place of business of the person, firm, corporation or association to whom the same is issued. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 6, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-6, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed § 12-17. Formerly, § 12-17 pertained to transfer of licenses and derived from Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 11, 14, 15, adopted Dec. 17, 1981. For provisions re transfer of certificates of registration the user's attention is directed to § 21-49.5 herein. 
Sec. 12-18. - License inspector; duties. 
The chief of police or any other member of the police force of the said city, or other person, may be appointed or designated by the city manager as "license inspector," and it shall be his duty to personally visit every place of business within the said city and determine whether or not each such place has a properly posted license. It shall be the duty of the license inspector to make a case or cases against each and every person, firm, corporation or association having failed to obtain and post proper license within the time required by this article, or those having refused to register or pay the license required hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 12, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-19. - Failure to register and pay license fee. 
Upon the failure of any person, firm, corporation or association to register as herein required and pay the license fee herein prescribed, the city clerk shall, from the best information obtainable, register the same, and the chief of police is hereby required to report to the said city clerk any and all such failures to register which become known to him. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 7, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12-20. - Responsibility of licensee. 
Every person obtaining a license under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable and held responsible for any act of commission or omission by his agents or employees. 
Sec. 12-21. - Suspension, revocation. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, any other provision of this Code, or city ordinance, may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council for the violation by the licensee, his agents or employees, of any applicable provision of this Code, city ordinance or state law, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 12-22. - Penalty for violation 
Any person, firm, or corporation or association violating this article or any part of the same shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-10 of the Official Code of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 19, 12-17-81) 
Secs. 12-23—12-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-36, §§ 1—7, adopted Dec. 17, 1979, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been codified as superseding former Art. II, which consisted of §§ 12-35—12-41 and was derived from Ord. No. 78-8, §§ 1—7, adopted March 20, 1978, and Ord. No. 78-24, §§ 1—7, adopted Oct. 3, 1978. 

Sec. 12-35. - Insurer license fees. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Dublin, Georgia, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b), which is operating on behalf of insurers within the City of Dublin, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-3-5. 
(b)  For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) or thirty-five (35) per cent of the fee as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, whichever amount is greater. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 83-19, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-83; Ord. No. 84-10, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 96-4, 3-7-96) 
Sec. 12-36. - Agency license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) hereof, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each such location within the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 2, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 83-19, § 3, 11-3-83; Ord. No. 84-10, § 3, 6-28-84) 
Sec. 12-37. - Gross premiums tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the City of Dublin in the amount equal to one per cent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-35. 
(b)  There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-3-5, doing business within the City of Dublin in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) per cent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 3, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 83-19, §§ 4, 5, 11-3-83) 
Sec. 12-38. - Due date and required reports. 
(a)  License fees imposed in sections 12-35 and 12-36 shall be due and payable by the tenth day of February, 1984, and by the tenth of February of each subsequent year. 
(b)  The gross direct premiums tax set and levied by section 12-37 shall be due and payable upon the effective date of this article and then on the first day of January in each calendar year. Payment shall be deemed delinquent if not received within ninety (90) days from the due date. 
(c)  Payment of the company license fee and gross direct premiums tax herein levied by sections 12-35 and 12-36 shall be made to City of Dublin and shall be accompanied by a report showing the name and home office address of the insurance company seeking the license; the location and person in charge of each and every business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the city; the classes of insurance written and the premiums received for each class from policies insuring persons residing within the municipal corporate limits; and such other reasonable information as may be required. Such report shall be made on forms prescribed by the City of Dublin and filed over the affidavit of an officer of the company. 
(d)  Payment of the agency license fee herein levied by section 12-36 shall be made to the City of Dublin and shall be accompanied by a report showing the name and address of the person responsible for each business location subject to the license fee imposed; the address of each business location; the class or classes of insurance written at each business location; the names of the companies represented; and such other reasonable information as may be required. Such report shall be made on forms prescribed by the City of Dublin and filed over the affidavit of the person in charge of the agency seeking the license. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 4, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 81-29, § 12-17-81; Ord. No. 83-19, § 6, 11-3-83) 
Sec. 12-39. - False information. 
It is hereby declared to be a violation of this article for any person, firm, corporation or agent thereof knowingly to give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 5, 12-17-79) 
Sec. 12-40. - Confidentially of information. 
All reports required to be filed under the authority of this article shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 6, 12-17-79) 
Sec. 12-41. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall conduct business within the municipal corporate limits without having obtained a license therefor as required by this article, or who shall violate any other provision of this article, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished in the manner provided for violations of other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The gross direct premiums tax levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-36, § 7, 12-17-79) 
Secs. 12-42—12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-22, adopted Dec. 1, 1983, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 as §§ 12-51 and 12-52 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 12-51. - License tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one (1) per cent of the gross receipts of said institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 83-22, § 1, 12-1-83) 
Sec. 12-52. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the City of Dublin shall file a return of its gross receipts with the City of Dublin on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 83-22, § 2, 12-1-83) 
Secs. 12-53—12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 12-101. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for local licensing and regulation of locations where massage is offered, pursuant to the authority of section 1.4 of the Charter of the City of Dublin, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17), and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this article is a privilege, not a right. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions apply: 
Act means the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, enacted by and defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
Board means the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, enacted by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-4. 
For hire means a reasonable expectation that the person to whom the massage is provided, or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money, give other consideration, or provide any gratuity therefore. 
Massage means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation, the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Massage business or massage parlor means a business with a location in the city at which any person engages in or offers massage, regardless of the name of the business or the words used to describe the business through signage or advertisement or in filings with the secretary of state. Massage parlors are subject to regulation by a local government, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17) and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22(a) as amended. 
Massage therapist means: 
(1)  A person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. 
(2)  A person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state provisional permit in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, and working under the supervision of a licensed massage therapist. 
(3)  A person pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage therapist in an educational program recognized by the board, if such person is designated by title indicating student status and is fulfilling uncompensated work experiences required for the attainment of the degree or certificate, and working under the supervision of a licensed massage therapist. 
(4)  A nonresident person rendering massage therapy up to sixty (60) days during a twelve-month period for treatment of a temporary sojourner only; provided that such nonresident massage therapist holds a license, registration or certification from another state, jurisdiction or country if the requirements as determined by the Georgia Board for Licensure are substantially equal to the requirements contained in this chapter; or provided that such nonresident massage therapist is currently nationally certified in therapeutic massage and bodywork. 
(5)  A person duly licensed, registered, or certified in another jurisdiction, state, territory, or a foreign country when incidentally in this state to provide service as part of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief officials or as part of a charity event with which he or she comes into the state. 
Masseuse, masseur, massage practitioner , or persons practicing massage means a person who performs or engages in the practice of massage. 
State license means a license to practice massage therapy issued by the board, pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-103. - Requirements for licensure. 
(a)  State license. No person other than a massage therapist shall perform or offer to perform massage in the City of Dublin. 
(b)  City license. No person or entity shall operate a massage parlor without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended license from the city, pursuant to this article. Every person who performs or offers to perform massage on the premises must be a massage therapist as defined herein, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage parlor unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The city license of a massage parlor that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(c)  Conviction of a crime. No license under this section shall be issued or renewed to any person or entity who shall have been convicted for any charge involving a felony, crime of moral turpitude, prostitution, masturbation for hire, or any sexual service crime, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(d)  Age of licensee; education. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be issued a license to operate a massage parlor. 
(e)  Personal residency; agent. All applicants for licenses under this article and all actual owners of parlors for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of Laurens County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of such county during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one (1) or more residents in the county as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of Laurens County. 
(f)  Corporate residency. All applications for licenses under this article by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one (1) or more residents in the county as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this article. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this article or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the county, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the city clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(g)  Annual license fee. The annual license fee shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council, based upon the reasonable costs of the actual regulatory activity, and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-104. - Application for license. 
(a)  To operate a massage parlor within the boundaries of the city, the applicant must first make application to the city clerk on a form provided, and that person, after having fully and truthfully completed such form and paying the prescribed fees and having received a license, shall maintain and operate such business pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(b)  The "applicant" for a license hereunder shall be the actual owner of the proposed licensed business and may be a natural person, a corporation or a limited liability company. 
(1)  Where the applicant is a corporation, "applicant" shall be the president and secretary, and each officer must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition the corporation shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a limited liability company, "applicant" shall include all members and the manager, if the company is manager-managed, and each member and manager must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(3)  Partnerships shall not be issued licenses in a partnership name, but partners may be licensed individually, however if the partnership is only operating at a single location, only one (1) licensing fee shall be charged. 
(c)  Upon applying for a license with the finance officer of the city, each applicant shall provide a true and correct copy or original of the state license for each and every massage practitioner, performing or anticipated to perform massage at its location, and a list of all other employees to the finance officer for inspection and copying. Failure of any massage practitioner to provide his or her state license shall automatically result in the denial of the issuance of a city license to the applicant. 
(d)  Each applicant shall provide an original state GCIC criminal history with the application. 
(e)  Subsequent to the city license being issued, the licensee shall, in person, furnish to the finance officer a true and correct copy or original of the state license of each new massage practitioner at the licensee's massage parlor prior to such person's commencing to perform or offering to perform massage at such massage parlor. When any massage practitioner discontinues performing massage at a massage parlor, the licensee shall make the departure known in writing to the finance officer within thirty (30) days of such departure. 
(f)  Each applicant for a license shall make his or her affidavit before the finance officer, on a form provided by the finance officer, upon oath, swearing or affirming that all persons practicing massage on the premises of his or her massage parlor are licensed massage therapists and that all requirements of this article for a license have been met. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-105. - License renewal. 
Licenses for massage parlors may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee(s) continue to meet the requirements set out in this article and the requirements of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-106. - Registry. 
A registry shall be kept of all persons practicing massage on the premises of such massage parlor, which shall be available for inspection by an agent of the city during normal hours of business, providing the following information: 
(1)  Legal name and any other name(s) the massage practitioner has been or is known as or by; 
(2)  Current address including street and city; 
(3)  State or country of birth; date of birth; 
(4)  Number and expiration date of state license; and 
(5)  Position with the massage parlor or business entity. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-107. - Posting licenses and rates. 
(a)  Each massage parlor shall post its license obtained pursuant to this article, along with the state license of each masseuse operating on the premises of such parlor, in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep such licenses there at all times. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-108. - Escort services and adult entertainment prohibited. 
No massage parlor shall act as an escort or dating service. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-109. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage parlor or kept thereon. "Alcoholic beverages" means and includes all types and kinds of alcohol as defined in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-110. - Hours of operation; inspection. 
(a)  Massage parlors shall be open for business only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., inclusive. 
(b)  Any business holding a license issued under this article shall, at any time that the premises are open for business, be open to inspection by an officer of the police department, the health department, license inspectors, and/or fire department inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-111. - Name; place of business; sale, transfer or change of location. 
No person or business entity granted a location license pursuant to this article shall operate the business under a name not specified in the license, nor conduct business at any location or place not specified in the license. No license shall be transferable. Upon the sale or relocation of a massage parlor, the license thereof shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-112. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the premises of, and all equipment and supplies of, the massage parlor shall be kept clean and shall be operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  All employees and masseuses at each massage parlor shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the breast, buttocks and genital areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-113. - Revocation, suspensions, violations and penalties. 
(a)  The city may, upon notice and a hearing for good cause, revoke or suspend or place on probation the license of any massage parlor: 
(1)  That commits or allows any violations of the provisions of this article of the City Code; 
(2)  That allows any masseuse, working on the massage parlor's premises, to commit or offer to commit a sexual crime under O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 6; 
(3)  That allows any person to perform or offer massage on the premises who is not a licensed massage therapist; 
(4)  Where the applicant for the massage parlor's city license gave false information on the application, in his or her affidavit, or in the massage parlor's registry as required in this article, or fails to update information related to the license to the finance officer as required by this article; or 
(5)  Where the licensee fails at any time to meet the requirements for licensure under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of any section of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10, General penalty, of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Each day during which said offenses occur shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each separate act constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Sec. 12-114. - Exemptions. 
The requirements of this article shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses, barbers, beauty culturists, and cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43. 
(2)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals while working at their place of employment. 
(3)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(4)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local regulation of massage therapy by the laws of the state. 
(5)  A person who restricts his or her practice to the manipulation of the soft tissue of the human body to hands, feet, or ears who does not have the client disrobe and does not hold himself or herself out as a massage therapist. 
(6)  Any person who desires to provide in Dublin only certain bodywork services which the person believes are of a modality that is not a massage as defined in this article may request from the planning commission a waiver of the licensing requirements of this chapter for conducting the business of and providing such bodywork services. Such request will be made in writing, filed with the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, and shall fully explain why the modality is not massage therapy. The planning commission shall act upon the request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If the request is granted, the licensing requirements of this chapter shall be waived for the person making the request. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to this Code of Ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-21-2010) 
Secs. 12-115—12-140. - Reserved. 
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to prohibit, abate nuisances, § 1.4(26). 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash, Ch. 11; noise, § 14-34 et seq. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 72-401, 72-402; authority to adopt, enforce sanitary regulations, Ga. Code Ann., § 88-112. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed below: 
Nuisance: Anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se: An act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance: A nuisance limited in its injurious effect to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance: A nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
Sec. 13-2. - Enumeration. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and this section shall not be construed to limit the broad definitions of nuisance found in section 13-1 above, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort: Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious and offensive odors: The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter: The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind into any street, alley or public place or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution: The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Stagnant water: Standing and stagnant water on the premises. 
(6)  Emission of dense smoke: The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes in any one (1) hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(7)  Vacant lots: Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain, or where brush and grasses are permitted to grow, in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc: Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance, and any improvement that is an unsafe structure as defined in article III of this chapter. 
(9)  Animal enclosures: Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth, vermin or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(10)  Dead animals: The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(11)  Depositing trash, garbage, and refuse on private or public property: The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(12)  Unoccupied buildings: Unoccupied buildings that are not properly painted, cleaned, and secured. 
(13)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc.: Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, or junked vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of thirty (30) days or more, except in licensed junkyards. The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(14)  Gutters or spouts: Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any city street, lane or alley. 
(15)  Statutory nuisances: Any other condition constituting a nuisance under other sections of the Code of Ordinances, City of Dublin, or state law, including state minimum standard codes, building, fire, life and safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 89-14, 9-21-89; Ord. No. 05-16, §§ I, II, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-3. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. Violations of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both for each offense. Each day a nuisance continues to exist is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-4. - Issuance of summons for abatement and hearing. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under this article or any other city ordinance the chief of police, the chief building inspector or their designees may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for the condition. The summons shall describe the condition complained of and specify the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby. The summons shall require such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-5. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the court at the hearing required by section 13-4 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the city ordinances is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding. The order may provide any or all of the following: 
(1)  That the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. 
(2)  How the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. 
(3)  That if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition. 
(4)  Fine or imprisonment within the parameters of section 13-3. 
(b)  The expense thereof, including court costs and attorney fees, shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. Execution shall issue for such costs as for city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as for city taxes. 
(c)  Should the judge find that it is in the best interest of justice, he may order the city to proceed with a nuisance abatement action under article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-6. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth herein. Notice shall be given to the owner or manager responsible for the property of a hearing to be held at the next scheduled court date of the Dublin City Court. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-7. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 13-4 and 13-5 and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefor resides outside the city limits or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 30-75 shall be made by: 
(1)  Mailing a copy of the notice to any known address, by certified or registered mail or by statutory overnight mail; 
(2)  Posting a copy of the notice on the property involved; and 
(3)  Publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten (10) days nor less than one (1) day prior to the hearing. When personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 13-8. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any other violations, which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Ord. No. 05-16, 11-10-2005) 
Secs. 13-9—13-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles on private property, § 11-88 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 13-19. - Abandonment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle or appliance of any type within the city nor shall any vehicle or appliance left at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle or appliance reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 1, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-20. - Dismantled, etc., vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle or appliance on any street, lane or highway within the city. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 2, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-21. - Duty, responsibility of owner, occupant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or appliance of any kind or character to remain on such property within the city longer than fifteen (15) days unless said vehicle is stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or such vehicle or appliance is stored in an appropriate place and maintained in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 3, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-22. - Removal authorized. 
Upon violation of any provision of this article, the police department or other appropriate official designation by the city manager shall be authorized to have any vehicle or appliance thus abandoned on the streets or lanes of the city, removed, impounded and stored immediately pending the sale or other disposition thereof as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord, No. 69-9, § 4, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-23. - Notice to remove. 
When such vehicles or appliances are thus abandoned, stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property or premises within the city for a period of more than fifteen (15) days, notice shall be served personally by the police department, or other authorized official designated by the city manager to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises, if occupied, or if unoccupied, by certified U.S. mail to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises, with an additional notice posted on said vehicle or appliance, to remove, store or dispose of the same within ten (10) days from the date of said notice. Such notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle or appliance is abandoned, stored or parked in violation of this article and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of the same, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by the city marshal and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of said vehicle or appliance, and any remaining balance paid to the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 5, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-24. - Sale authorized. 
Upon failure of the owner to claim said vehicle or appliance within thirty (30) days after it has been impounded by the police department or other authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by the city. Such advertisement shall be published once in the newspaper in which official city notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle or appliance to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the police department as an abandoned vehicle or appliance, and will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date certain ten (10) days after the publication of the notice, unless said vehicle or appliance shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement thereof are paid prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 6, 4-21-69) 
Sec. 13-25. - Property posted. 
Any such vehicles or appliances removed from the streets or lanes of the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be similarly posted with the notice as provided herein, and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of such vehicle, or appliance known or capable of ascertainment. Any owner claiming a vehicle or appliance removed and stored prior to disposition thereof by the city marshal shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal and storage thereof before said vehicle or appliance shall be returned to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 69-9, § 7, 4-21-69) 
Secs. 13-26—13-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-32, adopted Nov. 20, 2003, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 13-30—13-40, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-7, adopted Feb. 3, 2000. 

Sec. 13-30. - Findings. 
(a)  The governing authority of the City of Dublin finds and declares that within the city limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life, safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, building, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures and vacant lots which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes, which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities: which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures or lots unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes mean: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 Title 8, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 25; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8, after October 1, 1991, provided by that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvement shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 Chapter 13 Title 16, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substance Act". 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing or crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest or interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Board of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Premises means vacant or occupied lots or the areas surrounding appurtenance to dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
Public authority means the City of Dublin Department of Billing Inspection or any public officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county or state relating to health, fire or building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, structures or premises in the municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 41 and by ordinances adopted by the City of Dublin to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances and state law, or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Unsafe buildings or premises are those that are not in compliance with applicable codes as defined herein; and include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Those whose interior or exterior bearing walls, or other vertical members list, lean or buckle to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such member or members below the minimum required by the building codes of the city; 
(2)  Those which have parts which are so attached they are likely to fall and injure persons or property; 
(3)  Those which in whole or in part are so dilapidated, decayed, damaged from any cause or deteriorated in any manner that they are likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(4)  Those which are likely to cause injury to persons or property because they contain weakened, defective or deteriorated footings or foundations, floorings or floor supports, ceilings or ceiling supports or roof or chimney; 
(5)  Those which have visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(6)  Those which are likely to cause injury to persons or property in the event of catastrophe, windstorm, fire, earthquake, panic because of inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators, fire escapes or other means of egress as required by the building and safety codes of the city; 
(7)  Those which are likely to cause injury to persons or property because they have defective or inadequate plumbing, improper sanitation facilities, insufficient ventilation, or lack of running water, as required by the building codes of the city, or other ordinance of the city; 
(8)  Those which constitute fire hazards as defined in the housing code of the city, or other applicable ordinance and which are thereby dangerous to persons or property; 
(9)  Those which are vacant, and because of lack of proper maintenance, deterioration or decay, or fire hazards, are otherwise dangerous to human life, safety, health or morals; 
(10)  Those where an accumulation of weeds trash junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions create a public health hazard or a general health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-14, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 13-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the identification of buildings, dwellings, structures, or premises which are unfit or unsafe for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and which are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, structures or premises, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 44-2-1 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-32.1 - Duties of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, premises, or property within the City of Dublin to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, premises, or property in conformance with all applicable codes laws and ordinances in force within the city, whether federal, state or local, and also such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, premises, or property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-33. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  The chief building inspector shall be and is hereby designated and appointed the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The public officer shall investigate and determine which buildings or structures in the city are unfit or unsafe for human habitation or occupancy. The public officer shall determine under this article, whether a dwelling, building, structure or premises is unfit or unsafe for human habitation or is unfit or unsafe for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is a nuisance if he finds that conditions exist in such building dwelling, structure or premises, which are dangerous or injurious, to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures or of other residents of the city as determined under this article. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Those conditions described in section 13-31 herein. 
(c)  The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)  Investigate the dwelling conditions in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, or are vacant, dilapidated, unsafe, or are being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agent, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(d)  The public officer designated herein may make his determination that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-34. - Filing of complaint and hearing. 
Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, premises or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, premises or property is unfit or unsafe for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the compliant to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The compliant shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said compliant in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the compliant and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-35. - Order upon hearing. 
(a)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, premises, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the compliant or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, premises or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, premises or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, premises or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, premises or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, premises, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property or premises. 
(b)  For purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavit of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 39A of Title 43, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction: 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-36. - Service of complaints and orders. 
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties who identities and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties, whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county in which dwelling, building or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to the service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-14, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 13-37. - Enforcement of orders. 
If the owner fails to comply with any order to repair, improve, remove, or demolish the dwelling, building, premises or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, premises or structure to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Anytime during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, premises or structure a placard with the following words: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION OR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, OR BUSINESS USE AND DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE APPLICABLE CODES OR HAS BEEN ORDERED SECURED TO PREVENT ITS USE IN CONNECTION WITH DRUG CRIMES OR CONSTITUTES AN ENDANGERMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH OR SAFETY AS A RESULT OF UNSANITARY OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS. THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF THIS BUILDING IS PROHIBITED UNLAWFUL. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-14, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 13-38. - Lien on property for costs. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of repair, alteration or improvement, or the cost of vacation and closing, or the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition and reasonable attorney's fees of the city, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  The lien provided for herein shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring the property to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and/or closed or demolished, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Laurens County, Georgia, and shall relate back to the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of the superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of cost to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the City of Dublin. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real or property ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipality tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of the completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes to collect the amount of the lien, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose lien is being collected. 
(d)  The enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(e)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section, together with interest, penalties and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The City of Dublin may waive and release any such lien imposed on the property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the City of Dublin agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-14, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 13-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-40. - Burned structures. 
(a)  In the event that a structure burns or has substantial fire damage, i.e. that which is more than fifty (50) per cent damaged, the building official or fire official may declare that the structure constitutes a public hazard if in its after condition it is a fire hazard, pursuant to the city building and/or fire codes, to the health, safety and welfare of the public and is considered to be an unsafe building pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon service of this notice, either by a duly appointed police officer, process server or by certified mail, the property owner shall within ten (10) days of the notice submit a written plan of corrective action to the fire official and building official according to the specifications contained in the notice. 
(c)  The building official and fire official shall then make a determination if the plans as submitted, comply with all local, state and federal codes, laws, regulations and ordinances. If they are not in compliance, the applicant can then have five (5) days from receipt of comments and suggested revisions to resubmit the final corrected plans for rehabilitation. Once the plans, as submitted, are approved, the building official and the applicant shall agree on a rehabilitation schedule for said building. The city has five (5) days from receipt of the plans to approve, disapprove or return for corrections. 
(d)  If the plans are not submitted or are not approved or have not been approved within thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice as provided for in this section, the city is authorized to begin condemnation proceedings under this chapter. 
(e)  Any denial of plans and or variations may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals within ten (10) days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 13-41. - Remedies. 
Nothing in this Code section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Dublin to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. This section is meant to be complementary and in addition to any other remedies provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, the City's Charter or other applicable law. The city may provide by ordinance that designated public officers may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in the municipal court of the City of Dublin prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-32, 11-20-2003) 
Secs. 13-42—13-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 13-50. - Purpose and intent. 
These regulations are intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting, eliminate problems of glare, and minimize light trespass and pollution, with regulations that avoid unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties or streets. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-51. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Code section, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 
Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp(s) and can include all or some of the following parts: A housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see (and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness), or that causes annoyance or discomfort. 
Indirect light: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. 
Light trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
Luminaire: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture. This term shall be interpreted broadly as applying to all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices (permanently installed or portable), used for illumination or advertisement. 
Luminaire, full cutoff: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no direct light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane. 
Outdoor lighting: The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
Searchlight: High-intensity electric light with a reflector shaped to concentrate the beam, used to illuminate or search for distant objects or as a beacon. 
Security lighting: Exterior lighting installed solely to enhance the security of people and property by aiding detecting and deterring intruders. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-52. - Applicability. 
All public and private outdoor lighting installed in the City of Dublin shall be in conformance with the requirements established by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-53. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  All temporary emergency lighting needed by police or fire departments or other emergency services. 
(2)  Any luminaire required by federal, state or local laws or regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Lighting equipment within public right-of-way or easement for the principal purpose of illuminating streets, roadways and/or other areas open to public transport by vehicle or pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  All vehicular luminaires on vehicles in use for transportation. 
(5)  Public ball fields. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-54. - Partial exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from section 13-56, but such lighting must be directed so as not to cause glare, as described in section 13-57 herein: 
(1)  Tennis courts. 
(2)  Temporary lighting equipment which shall be in use for thirty (30) days or less. 
(3)  Seasonal lighting equipment provided that individual lamps are ten (10) watts or less. 
(4)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels. 
(5)  Lighting equipment solely for signs, to the extent that this lighting is not regulated by the City of Dublin Sign Ordinance. 
(6)  Security lighting. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-55. - Prohibitions. 
The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited: Searchlights and the use of laser source light, or any similar high intensity light, except where exempt pursuant to subsections 13-53(1) or (2). 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-56. - Newly installed luminaries to comply. 
All luminaries, except for those specifically exempted by this section, hereafter installed for outdoor lighting in the City of Dublin, shall be full cutoff luminaries, as defined by this section, or another luminaire that does not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire, or may be of any other type that is modified or shielded in such a way that no direct light is allowed to trespass on the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-57. - Luminaries creating glare to be redirected. 
Any luminaire that is aimed, directed or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-58. - Penalties for violation. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set out in section 1-10 herein. Each day any violation of this article is committed or allowed to continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Sec. 13-59. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable and if any paragraph, section, subsection, or part of this article is held to be invalid, unenforceable, unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair the remainder of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, 5-7-2009) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parades, § 20-33 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Crimes, Ga. Code Ann., Tit. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two (2) or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 17-5) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate disorderly conduct, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-2605. 
Sec. 14-2. - Fortune-telling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of fortune-telling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred and similar practices, businesses or professions, including the giving of advice concerning vocational guidance when based solely on the study of the hand or palm, where a charge is made or donation or contribution accepted for such service or services unless such person is a resident of the city before doing business, purchases a business license according to the business license ordinance and chapter 12 of this Code and approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 72-35, 8-21-72) 
Sec. 14-3. - Wearing masks, hoods in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on any of the public streets of the city or in any of the public places of the city wearing a mask, hood or other apparel or regalia in such manner as to conceal his identity, or in such manner that his face is not fully visible, or in such manner that he may not be recognized; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to or enforced against children sixteen (16) years of age and under who may participate in traditional Halloween activities on the evening of the last day in October of each year, and who may be garbed in the usual or customary children's Halloween costumes. 
(Code 1964, § 17-31) 
Sec. 14-4. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(d)  No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(e)  A person also commits the offense of loitering when that person remains idle (including spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, driving about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles) at a place where there is posted a clearly visible "no loitering" sign, where the person does not leave the premises after request by the owner or a law enforcement officer. 
(f)  A person committing the offense of loitering shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 17-20; Ord. No. 06-16, 10-19-2006) 
Sec. 14-5. - Drinking in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous, malt or alcoholic beverage in public, or to possess any open container in public. 
(b)  "Public" for purposes of this section shall mean any street, alley, sidewalk, public parking lot, public building or public park, and shall include the confines of a motor vehicle when the vehicle is parked on any street, alley, sidewalk, public parking lot or public park. 
(c)  "Public" shall not mean property owned by the Dublin-Laurens County Development Authority or Main Street Dublin—The Downtown Development Authority, which entities may allow or forbid alcohol consumption on property they own, pursuant to their individual policies. It shall be unlawful to consume any spirituous, malt or alcoholic beverage on the property of these authorities without their specific permission at an officially sanctioned event. 
(Code 1964, § 17-10; Ord. No. 10-10, § 5, 6-17-2010) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4. 
State Law reference— For municipal authority to prohibit drunkenness, see Gen. Code Ann., § 58-608. 
Sec. 14-6. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching or batting a ball on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
Sec. 14-7. - Going-out-of-business sales. 
(a)  Any person seeking a license for a going-out-of-business, fire, quitting business or other similar sale shall be required to furnish in writing an application for the license stating the true name and address of the owner of the goods to be sold; the place where such sale is to be conducted; the manner of the occupancy of the premises where such goods are to be sold and, if leased, the time of termination or expiration of the lease; a full statement as to the reason for such sale and why urgent and expeditious disposal of the goods is necessary; the proposed content of any advertising; and a complete inventory of the goods to be sold. 
(b)  All goods subject to such sale as shown by said inventory must have been purchased prior to such application and must not be subject to refusal or cancellation of order. 
(c)  The licensee hereunder shall: 
(1)  Make no additions whatever to the inventory of goods during the period of the licensed sale according to such inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Make no false or untrue statement or representation in making application for such license. 
(3)  Refrain from using any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(4)  Conduct such sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(5)  Refrain from any advertising of such sale prior to issuance of the license hereunder provided. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12-6, 12-12) 
Sec. 14-8. - Bond, liability insurance required for amusement rides. 
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license or permit is required by any other provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 14-9. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(2)  Exposure of the genitals; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; 
(5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(6)  Urination or defecation; or 
(7)  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three (3) inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) on the first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent offense. In addition to the fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to forty (40) hours of court-approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section, however, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense under this section if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state Constitution. Any defense under this section must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, 9-2-2010) 
Secs. 14-10—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 14-20. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any weapon except: 
(1)  By an officer of the law or member of the military in the performance of his duty; 
(2)  In properly zoned and properly constructed permanent indoor ranges, which have been permitted and licensed by the city; 
(3)  Persons using air guns at temporary, organized events under the direct supervision of an adult over the age of eighteen (18), with the written permission of the city manager or his designee; 
(4)  For defense of person or property, where such defense would constitute legal justification under state law; 
(5)  Persons using bows or cross-bows, BB guns, slingshots, paintball guns or similar weapons on tracts of land containing twenty (20) or more acres, but in no case shall such be used within three hundred (300) yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof, and only if the projectile fired is certain not to leave the exempted tract. 
(b)  "Weapon" for purposes of this Code section shall include any type firearm, gun, cannon, pistol, air-gun, BB gun, bow, cross-bow, slingshot, paintball gun, or any device designed or intended to propel a shot, bullet, or other missile of any kind, or any device capable of discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas or explosive. 
(c)  In addition to the penalty for the violation of this section, the municipal court judge may order any weapon seized in connection with such violation to be forfeited to the city and the same shall be disposed of by the chief of police pursuant to the law. 
(Ord. No. 72-11, § 17-29, 3-6-72; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-2-2012) 
Sec. 14-21. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to maliciously, or with disregard of safety, throw any stone, rock, arrow, or other missile. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 2-2-2012) 
Sec. 14-22. - Knives, etc., prohibited; exceptions; destruction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess or carry upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of said city, or in any hotel lobby, theater, railroad depot, bus station or terminal, poolroom, billiard parlor or room, dance hall, beer parlor, nightclub, tap room, baseball park, fair grounds, bus, taxicab or in any other public place in said city, or in any place, business establishment in said city which is patronized or frequented by the public, any of the following implements unless the same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure being applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has an obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which, when opens projects from the handle more than three (3) inches. This provision includes all knives such as butcher knives and other knives which do not close; however, this provision shall not apply to butcher knives which do not close when the same are in use or are held or possessed for use in the performance of the lawful business or practice of business and professional establishments and offices duly licensed by the city or otherwise lawfully authorized to transact business or practice professions in said city. 
(4)  Any razor, but provision shall not apply to barbers, beauticians and similar artisans when actually engaged in the practice of their respective vocations or trades, or when held or possessed for such purposes. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, but this provision shall not apply to any person actually engaged in delivering ice or in the actual performance of his or her trade or other vocation. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the implements, described herein, when the same are held or possessed for purposes of sale by business establishments or individuals duly licensed by the city to sell the same, but shall apply to business establishments and individuals who hold or possess any of said implements for sale and who are not duly licensed by the city to sell the same. 
(c)  The city judge shall have power and authority, and it shall be his duty upon finding that any of the devices and implements hereinbefore described have been unlawfully held, possessed or carried in violation of the provisions of this section, unless said devices or implements are required as evidence in state courts, to condemn the same as a nuisance, being contrary to the peace and good order of the city and the safety of its citizens, and the recorder shall order the destruction of the same and said order shall immediately be executed by the clerk of the city court. 
(Code 1964, § 17-18.1) 
Secs. 14-23—14-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Sound vehicles restricted, § 3-6; barking, howling dogs, § 5-22; nuisances, ch. 13. 

Sec. 14-34. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the city limits. 
Sec. 14-35. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns: The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets and similar devices: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers: The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the city for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity for any other purpose, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the city manager or chief of police. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity: The operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads or projects within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the city manager or chief of police. 
(5)  Exhausts: The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds: The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas: The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals: The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers: The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums: The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the city manager or chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 17-21) 
Sec. 14-36. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
Sec. 14-37. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatements summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE IV. - BAD CHECK CHARGES 

Sec. 14-38. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to issue a bad check for payment of any obligation to the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-8, 2-18-88) 
ARTICLE V. - TREES 

Sec. 14-39. - Protective regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Approved trees means those trees approved or planting within street rights-of-way consisting of the following: 
(1)  Cedar. 
(2)  Dogwood. 
(3)  Ginko. 
(4)  Holly. 
(5)  Live oak. 
(6)  Magnolia. 
(7)  Redbud. 
(8)  Cherry laurel. 
(9)  Crepe myrtle. 
(10)  Red maple. 
(11)  Other species of trees approved by the building inspector of the city. 
Plantings means any flower, bush, vegetable, grass, etc., other than a tree or shrubbery. 
Shrubbery means any perennial woody growth with branches at or near the ground. 
(b)  Intent. The city intends to promote the community health and welfare by protecting the trees and woodlands for the unique benefits they provide in enhancing community appearance and assisting in the control of solar heat and glare, soil conservation, air pollution, and noise abatement. In addition, trees and woodlands offer a haven for a manmade urban environment. Further, it is the intent of the city to enhance the community and its citizens, and not to be punitive or to cause a hardship to any individual, private or public company who use reasonable care and diligence to protect trees and woodlands within the city. 
(b)  Protected. Trees, regulated and protected herein, are declared to be a natural public resource and the city encourages planting, replacement and protection of trees, in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. To attain that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any tree or woodlands located within street rights-of-way, parks, public places, and any other properties owned by the city and located within its corporate limits without the permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, 2-20-97; Ord. No. 03-13, 5-15-2003) 
Sec. 14-40. - Creation of tree board. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a tree board for the City of Dublin, Georgia (hereinafter in this article referred as the to as "board"). 
(b)  The board shall consist of twelve (12) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Dublin, Georgia, and who shall be residents of Laurens County, but need not be residents of the City of Dublin, Georgia. These members shall include a registered landscape architect, a registered forester, recreation authority representative, public works department representative, Keep Dublin Laurens Beautiful, Inc. representative, Dublin City Council Member, Georgia Power Company representative, a representative of a utility company providing service within the corporate limits of the city and four (4) interested lay persons or garden club members. The board shall choose its own officers and keep minutes of all proceedings. A majority of the members present shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The term of the twelve (12) persons shall be three (3) years, except that the term of four (4) members appointed to the first term will be for one (1) year only, and the term of four (4) lay members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. 
(d)  The board shall be responsible for writing and implementing the annual community forestry work plan upon the approval of the Dublin City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, 1-20-2000) 
ARTICLE VI. - ALARMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-06, adopted Apr. 18, 2002, set out provisions regulating alarm systems. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as art. VI, §§ 14-41—14-44 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— False alarms prohibited, § 10-5; Reward for arrest of persons making false alarms, § 10-6. 

Sec. 14-41. - Alarm requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install an alarm system in the City of Dublin without first obtaining an installation permit from the 911 center. If a person fails to obtain a permit prior to installation, the alarm system shall be disconnected until the proper registration is obtained. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install an alarm system in the City of Dublin who does not possess the proper state licenses. 
(c)  All alarm systems shall be keyed to a private service which can notify the 911 center when an alarm has been activated. It shall be unlawful for any person to install an alarm system with an automatic calling device keyed to the 911 center. 
(d)  Any person in violation of the above requirements shall have the alarm system disconnected and fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 02-06, 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-42. - False alarms. 
Upon any false alarm being activated where public safety officers are dispatched to the premises, the resident of the premises shall pay the following penalties: 

 
(Ord. No. 02-06, 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-43. - Appeals. 
In the event a penalty is assessed as a result of a false alarm and the resident of the premises disagrees with the false alarm classification, he or she may appeal the ruling to the public safety committee by utilizing the following procedure: 
(1)  The person assessed a penalty shall request an appeal hearing in writing before the public safety committee. The request shall state the reasons for the appeal. 
The public safety committee is chaired by the council representative and also includes the chief of police and the fire chief. 
(2)  An appeal hearing will then be set up within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for appeal. 
(3)  The decision of the public safety committee will be final. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-44. - Exclusions. 
(a)  False alarms that are a result of an act of nature (power outage, storm, etc.) will not count as a false alarm against the residence or business. 
(b)  False alarms which occur within ten (10) days of installation shall not be counted against the residence or business. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, 4-18-2002) 
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for parks, § 11(e); public parks, § 18 et seq. 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Motor vehicles restricted. 
No motorized vehicles of any type shall be allowed on public parks, playgrounds, or school areas under the supervision of the department of parks and recreation unless the person operating such vehicle shall have first received written permission from the director of parks and recreation, with the exception of motorized vehicles entering such areas for the purpose of construction or routine maintenance. This section does not prohibit the use of motorized vehicles on established streets, roadways or parking areas, nor is the use of emergency vehicles prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 75-19, § 1, 6-2-75) 
Cross reference— Traffic generally, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 15-2. - Prohibited activities. 
No person shall use or occupy any public park, playground, picnic area, athletic field or other recreation facility under the supervision of the department of parks and recreation, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless such use or occupancy is in connection with a regularly scheduled activity or event of the department of parks and recreation, or unless written permission has been previously obtained from the director of parks and recreation or city manager, excluding members of the city council for the purpose of investigation. 
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 1, 10-1-81) 
Secs. 15-3—15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 15-16. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the recreation board of the city, pursuant to the authority of chapter 69-6, Georgia Code Annotated, which board shall be for the purposes contemplated by said law and which board shall have the duties, powers and authority provided by said law. 
(Code 1964, § 18-1) 
Sec. 15-17. - Composition. 
The recreation board shall be composed of seven (7) members. 
(Ord. No. 73-2, § 18-2, 1-8-73) 
Sec. 15-18. - Appointment. 
Members of the recreation board shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 73-2, § 18-2, 1-8-73) 
Sec. 15-19. - Terms. 
Of the initial members appointed to the recreation board, four (4) members shall serve terms of three (3) years, and three (3) shall serve two (2) years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members may be appointed to more than one successive term of office. 
(Code 1964, §§ 18-2, 18-4—18-6; Ord. No. 73-2, § 18-2, 1-8-73) 
Sec. 15-20. - Filling vacancies. 
Vacancies on the recreation board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1964, § 18-3) 
Sec. 15-21. - Compensation. 
The members of the recreation board shall serve without any remuneration or financial benefit of any kind. 
(Code 1964, § 18-7) 
Sec. 15-22. - Officers. 
The recreation board shall elect one of its members as president and shall elect such other officers as the board may deem necessary. The terms of office of the officers of the board in such official capacity, as distinguished from the terms of members on the board, shall be determined by the board; except that the term of office of any officer of the board shall not be for a longer time than his term of office as a member of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 18-8) 
Sec. 15-23. - Meetings. 
The recreation board shall hold an organizational meeting in January of each year for the purpose of electing its president and other officers and for such other purposes as the board may deem appropriate. Thereafter, the board shall hold regular meetings at such time and place as it may determine. 
(Code 1964, § 18-12) 
Sec. 15-24. - Statutory duties. 
The duties, powers and authority of the recreation board provided and specified by this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to all duties, powers and authority provided by Chapter 69-6, Georgia Code Annotated. 
(Code 1964, § 18-9) 
Sec. 15-25. - Authority over parks. 
While the board is named and to be known as recreation board of the city, it is intended and contemplated that such board shall have all of the powers, duties and obligations with respect to parks and all other matters contemplated by the aforementioned laws of the state concerning park and recreation boards, the word "park" being deleted from the name of the board established by this chapter only for the sake of brevity in name without any intention to thereby limit or restrict the powers, duties and authority of said board. 
(Code 1964, § 18-10) 
Sec. 15-26. - Regulatory authority. 
The recreation board shall make such rules and regulations governing the operation, organization and conduct of the board and of all facilities and activities operated by the board as the board shall see fit. 
(Code 1964, § 18-11) 
Sec. 15-27. - General powers, duties. 
The recreation board of the city shall operate and supervise the public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and the other recreational facilities owned, leased or controlled by the city or owned, leased or controlled by the recreation board of the city. The board shall have supervision of the facilities and activities provided and conducted on, or in connection with, all of the parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreational centers, and all other facilities hereinbefore mentioned. The board shall have the power to conduct any form of recreational or cultural activity that they may deem proper or appropriate. The recreation board of the city may create policies for and shall have authority over and shall administer coordinated recreational services, and the board may cooperate with other similar local, state and federal authorities. 
(Code 1964, § 18-13) 
Sec. 15-28. - Funds. 
In carrying out the purpose of this chapter, the recreation board is authorized to receive and disburse for such purposes any funds appropriated to it by the city together with any other funds derived from gifts, grants, donations, bequests, devises, or from the board's operation and activities, subject only to the limitations and restrictions on such authority as may be specified in the laws of the state. 
All funds received by the recreation board shall be deposited with the board and withdrawn and disbursed by the board in the same manner as funds appropriated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 18-14) 
Sec. 15-29. - Employ personnel. 
The recreation board shall have power to employ a superintendent of recreation who shall be a person of proven executive and administrative ability with special or professional training in community recreation. Said board shall also have the power to employ such other persons as they deem necessary in the maintenance and operation of the recreational facilities and program on a permanent or part-time basis, and such persons shall be deemed employees of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 18-15) 
Sec. 15-30. - Budget. 
Not less than forty-five (45) days preceding the end of each fiscal year, or at such earlier date as may be fixed by the mayor and board of aldermen, the recreation board shall prepare a careful estimate in writing of the amounts of money required for the business and conduct of affairs of the board during the next fiscal year, which estimate shall specify in detail the object of the estimated amounts needed. Said estimate shall be submitted to the clerk of the city to be received by him for the information, consideration and benefit of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1964, § 18-16) 
Sec. 15-31. - Reports. 
The recreation board shall submit to the clerk of the city for the information, consideration and benefit of the mayor and board of aldermen a monthly and an annual report of the activities of the board and shall make and submit such other reports from time to time as may be required by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1964, § 18-17) 
Sec. 15-32. - Form of reports. 
The form of all reports submitted by the recreation board shall be determined and established by the board unless the board is directed to the contrary by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1964, § 18-18) 
Sec. 15-33. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the recreation board shall conform with that of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 18-19) 
Chapter 16 - PEDDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Revocation of permits, § 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definition. 
The word "peddler" as used in this chapter shall mean any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within this city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "street vendor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." 
Sec. 16-2. - Exceptions to chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; 
(b)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(c)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor; 
(d)  Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity within this city. 
Sec. 16-3. - Selling near schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell, cause to be sold or give away any merchandise on any street, sidewalk, land, or alley in the city that is immediately contiguous to any of the public school grounds in the city; provided, nothing herein contained shall apply to sales or gifts to persons other than school children. 
(Code 1964, § 19-2) 
Sec. 16-4. - Blocking traffic. 
(a)  Every peddler selling wares on the streets from a cart, buggy, wagon, automobile, truck or stand of any description shall be prohibited from stopping or placing for a period of more than ten (10) minutes said cart, stand, buggy, wagon, automobile or truck on any street within the city. 
(b)  The chief of police or any other policeman shall have the power and authority at any time to require any peddler to move whenever in their judgment the facility and convenience of traffic demand it. 
(Code 1964, § 19-3) 
Sec. 16-5. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect. 
Sec. 16-6. - Refusing to leave. 
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
Sec. 16-7. - Misrepresentation. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
Sec. 16-8. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
Secs. 16-9—16-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 16-20. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so. 
(Code 1964, § 19-1) 
Sec. 16-21. - Application. 
Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(a)  The name and a description of the applicant; 
(b)  The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(d)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(e)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(f)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery; 
(g)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(h)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, offense or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(i)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(j)  The last five (5) municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city; and 
(k)  Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant. 
Sec. 16-22. - Driver's license. 
At the time of filing his application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the city clerk. 
Sec. 16-23. - Application fee. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
Sec. 16-24. - False information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this article. 
Sec. 16-25. - Fingerprints. 
At the time of making application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the chief of police. 
Sec. 16-26. - Fee. 
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article the applicant therefor shall pay a fee, based upon the duration he desires to engage in business in the city, as follows: 
Per day ..... $50.00 
Per week ..... 100.00 
Per month ..... 250.00 
Sec. 16-27. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant, not a resident of the city, or who is a resident of the city and represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state, shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable to and approved by the mayor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the applicable provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city and state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the fictitious name act of the state, such corporation or fictitious name business may furnish one bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any and all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
Sec. 16-28. - Service of process. 
Before any permit shall issue under this article, there shall also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on the behalf of such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the city clerk. 
Sec. 16-28.1. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete his investigation within one week of receiving the application. 
Sec. 16-29. - Denial. 
If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit shall be issued. 
Sec. 16-30. - Issuance. 
If, as a result of investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit along with the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the required fee, deliver the permit to the applicant. 
Sec. 16-31. - Contents. 
Each permit issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time and same shall be operative, as well as the permit number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. 
Sec. 16-32. - Record. 
The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under this article. 
Sec. 16-33. - Display. 
Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed an offense. If a peddler uses a stand, vehicle or room in conducting his business, the permit shall be conspicuously posted so as to be easily visible to the public. 
Sec. 16-34. - Duration. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of one month. 
Sec. 16-35. - Revocation. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the board of commissioners for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Zoning authority, § 1.4(15). 
Cross reference— Engineering standards and specifications adopted, § 2-3; building, Ch. 6; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 24; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Liberal construction of chapter. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to be consistent with all provisions of applicable state law upon the subject, particularly Chapter 69-12 of the Georgia Code, and further shall be liberally construed to accomplish the intended purpose. 
(Code 1964, § 20-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Statute declared effective. 
Chapter 69-12 of the Georgia Code is hereby declared to be effective in the city, this declaration being made pursuant to the provisions of said chapter providing for and authorizing such declaration of effectiveness in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-2) 
Secs. 17-3—17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Planning commission generally, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 69-12. 

Sec. 17-16. - Created. 
There shall be and is hereby created and established a planning commission in and for the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-4) 
Sec. 17-17. - Composition. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(Code 1964, § 20-6; Ord. No. 78-20, § 1, 7-3-78) 
Sec. 17-18. - Appointment. 
(a)  The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the board of aldermen. All members who have served on said commission shall be eligible for reappointment to succeed themselves. The term of any member of the commission in office on the effective date of this section, and the term of any member appointed to the commission prior to the first regular meeting of the mayor and council to be held in January, 1979, shall expire upon the appointment and qualification of a successor. 
(b)  At the first regular meeting of the mayor and council held in January, 1979, the seven (7) members of the planning commission shall be appointed or reappointed for terms as set forth in section 17-19. 
(Code 1964, § 20-7; Ord. No. 78-20, § 1, 7-3-78) 
Sec. 17-19. - Terms. 
At the first regular meeting of the mayor and council held in January, 1979, all seven (7) members of the planning commission shall be appointed or reappointed for initial terms of one, two (2) and three (3) years. At the time of appointment, at the first meeting of the mayor and council in January of 1979, two (2) members shall be appointed for one year; two (2) members shall be appointed for two (2) years; and three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years. Thereafter, the terms of all members shall be three (3) years. 
(Code 1964, § 20-7; Ord. No. 78-20, § 1, 7-3-78) 
Sec. 17-20. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only and in the same manner as for original appointments. 
Sec. 17-21. - Removal. 
Any member of the planning commission may be removed by the mayor or city council for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
Sec. 17-22. - Compensation. 
All members of the municipal planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
Sec. 17-23. - Officers. 
The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairperson and shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city or of the planning commission. 
Sec. 17-24. - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or commission shall determine. 
Sec. 17-25. - Rules and regulations. 
The rules, regulations, and provisions contained in Chapter 69-12 of the Georgia Code Annotated governing the creation, appointment, organization, powers, and duties of municipal and county planning commissions are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions governing the planning commission of this municipality. 
Sec. 17-26. - Records. 
The planning commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 17-27. - Employ personnel. 
Employees and staff may be appointed by the planning commission as necessary. 
Sec. 17-28. - Powers and duties. 
The municipal planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare plans for physical, social, and economic growth in an effort to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare of the municipality. In carrying out its objectives the planning commission shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(a)  To prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city; 
(b)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a zoning ordinance and map for the city; 
(c)  To prepare and recommend for adoption regulations for the subdivision of land within the city limits and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
(d)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a plat or plats or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, unlined or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites and provide for the regulation of construction of buildings or other structures within such lines; 
(e)  To cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or quasi-public agencies and to expend such funds; and 
(f)  To exercise all other powers and duties conferred upon municipal planning commissioners by Chapter 69-12 of the Georgia Code Annotated and by any other provisions of state law. 
(Code 1964, § 20-5) 
Chapter 17½ - PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS, PAWNSHOPS AND SCRAP METALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, adopted May 21, 2015, renamed Ch. 17½ and repealed the former Art. I, §§ 17½-1—17½-19, enacting a new Art. I as herein set out. The former chapter and article pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 12; peddlers, Ch. 16. 

ARTICLE I. - PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND PAWNSHOPS 

Sec. 17½-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or articles containing any precious metal or gems from members of the general public for resale to brokers, dealers or melters. 
Electronic reporting system means a computer based system as specified by the Chief of Police which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Goods means every species of tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means any person (with the exception of title pawnbrokers), whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Pawnshop means any person (with the exception of title pawnbrokers), whether as owner, agent or employee engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means metals that are considered rare or having a high economic value including, but not limited to, silver, gold, platinum and similar metals and their alloys. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 1, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-2. - Violations and penalties. 
The performance of any act prohibited by any section or provision of this chapter, or the failure to perform any act required thereby, shall constitute a violation and an offense hereunder and any person found guilty in the city court of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 2, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-3. - License required; application. 
(a)  No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals and gems in the city except under a license granted by the city. 
(b)  A license for a dealer in precious metals and gems shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business of a dealer in precious metals and gems as defined herein. 
(c)  Application for a license shall be made to the city clerk. 
(d)  All applications for a license shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). All applications shall be in writing upon a form supplied to all applicants by the clerk. The application shall be made by a person having at least a twenty-five (25) percent ownership interest in the business and shall set forth the names, addresses and ages of all persons having an ownership interest in the business and shall contain an accurate description of the premises upon which the business is to be conducted, along with the zoning classification therefor and such other information as may be required. 
(e)  All applicants shall swear or affirm that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct. 
(f)  The license application must be approved by the chief of police and accompanied by a report from the office of the chief of police indicating that the police department has made an investigation of all persons identified on the application as having an ownership interest in the business and that said investigation has not revealed any felony convictions or convictions for violation of any laws or ordinances involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in Title 26 of Georgia Code Annotated. A plea of guilty or nolo contendere or a bond forfeiture shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 3, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-4. - Age requirements for owners, employees and sellers. 
(a)  Every person having an ownership interest in the business carried on by a dealer in precious metals and gems and all employees engaged in said business shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the business of purchasing gems, precious metals or goods made from precious metals shall not purchase gems, precious metals or goods made from precious metals from any person who has not provided positive identification, including reliable proof that such person is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 4, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-5. - Records required; inspection of records. 
Every person or business engaged as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, and dealer in precious metals and gems within the City of Dublin shall secure from every person from whom he receives any goods, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a social security or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face for each transaction, and if multiple transactions are made at different times of the same day a separate photo shall be taken. Each digital image shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption; a video surveillance system that records and stores the information set forth above shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this subsection; 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including the following information, if available: 
(a)  Brand name. 
(b)  Model number. 
(c)  Manufacturer's serial number. 
(d)  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye. 
(e)  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known. 
(f)  Gemstone description. 
(g)  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge. 
(h)  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters. 
(i)  The date and time of the transaction. 
(j)  For jewelry and gems, a digital photograph of the goods acquired. 
(5)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain the above information and digital photographs for a period of three (3) years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(6)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems shall require the seller to sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 5, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015; Ord. No. 15-09, § 1, 10-15-2015) 
Sec. 17½-5.5. - Required format. 
Every pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems located within the City of Dublin shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the City of Dublin Police Department, of all transactions that occurred during the twenty-four-hour period ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made each day prior to 11:59 p.m. for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the police department. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the police department in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-6. - Holding period. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop or dealer in precious metals and gems who takes goods on pawn, taking full title thereto, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop or dealer in precious metals and gems who buys goods, taking full title thereto shall hold the goods so taken in on purchase for at least ten (10) days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise, and shall not alter the original form, shape or condition of such metals during the ten-day holding period. 
(c)  The City of Dublin Police Department or any other law enforcement agency has the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on law enforcement hold. In that event, the Dublin Police Department or other law enforcement agency shall notify the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems of the need for a law enforcement hold and identify all property subject to the law enforcement hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker, pawnshop or dealer in precious metals and gems to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from law enforcement hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 6, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-7. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the mayor and council, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given to a licensee. If the city manager has determined that there is probably cause to believe that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has violated this chapter, the city manager may temporarily suspend said license for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 7, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-8. - Administrative inspection of goods and records. 
(a)  The City of Dublin finds that pawnbrokers, pawnshops and dealers in precious metals and gems are engaged in a business that is a pervasively regulated industry and that proper enforcement of this article requires the administrative inspection of the commercial property where these businesses are located. 
(b)  All goods pledged or sold to a pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems as well as all records and documentation required to be kept by this article shall be subject to an administrative inspection by the Dublin Police Department as provided for in this article. 
(c)  As such, every pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems shall admit to his premises, without a search warrant, any police officer, or designated civilian employee of the City of Dublin Police Department, whose duties include verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and locating goods that are missing or stolen. These administrative inspections shall occur during normal business hours unless consented to by the pawnbroker, pawnshop and dealer in precious metals and gems. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-9. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Dublin Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Sworn officers of the City of Dublin Police Department and civilian employees designated by the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. 
These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and to locate goods that are missing or stolen. This article shall not limit the authority of any other Dublin Police Department officer or employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 17½-10. - Compliance with state and federal law. 
Nothing in this article shall relieve a pawnbroker, pawnshop, and dealer in precious metals and gems from the necessity of complying with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Secs. 17½-11—17½-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP METALS 

Sec. 17½-20. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Book or register means a written record of transactions kept by any scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer, including sequentially numbered receipts containing the information required by section 17½-21. 
Dealer means any person, business, or entity that buys, sells, or distributes, for the purpose of recycling, any scrap metal on a wholesale basis. 
Scrap metal means a metal containing brass, copper, copper alloy, aluminum, stainless steel, or magnesium or another metal traded on the scrap markets. 
Working day means Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, except for such days which are designated a legal holiday by the state. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-21. - Register required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in section 17½-23, every scrap metal processor as defined by Georgia Law, and any owner, keeper, or proprietor of a junk shop, junk store, salvage yard, or vehicle used to collect scrap metals (including vehicles), shall keep a book or register detailing all transactions involving scrap metals or vehicles. 
(b)  The scrap metal processor owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer shall record the identification of a seller of scrap metals or vehicles in the book or register and the method by which the seller verified his or her identity. The seller shall verify his or her identity by one (1) of the following: 
(1)  A valid Georgia driver's license; 
(2)  An identification card issued in accordance with O.C.G.A 40-5-100; 
(3)  A valid driver's license from another state that contains picture identification; 
(4)  A military identification card; 
(5)  A valid United States passport; or 
(6)  An alien registration card; 
(c)  The scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer shall require the seller of a scrap metal to provide a signed affidavit, in a form approved by the City of Dublin Police Department, sworn and affirmed under penalty of law, that the seller is the owner of the scrap metal or is otherwise entitled to sell the scrap metal. The scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer shall provide the affidavit form to the seller. 
(d)  The scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer shall include the following in the book or register: 
(1)  The date of purchase; 
(2)  The name, birth date, sex, and address of the seller; 
(3)  The license plate number of the vehicle used to deliver the material; 
(4)  A description of the purchase including weight and type; and 
(5)  The amount paid for the purchase. 
(e)  The book or register shall be made available to any peace officer for inspection at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-22. - Photographic identity of seller. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in section 17½-23, the scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer of any scrap metal shall hold the scrap metal purchased separate and apart from all other materials purchased for a period of not less than seven (7) working days after the date of purchase, during which period the scrap metal processor, owner, keeper, proprietor, collector, or dealer shall not change the form of the scrap metal and shall permit any law enforcement officer to make inspection of the scrap metal. 
(b)  However, any transaction for the purchase of a scrap metal wherein a digital photographic record, video record, or other record format is used to clearly identify the seller and the scrap metal that the seller is selling shall be exempt from this holding requirement. The digital photographic record, video record, or other record format shall be retained for ninety (90) days, and the owner shall permit a law enforcement officer to make inspections and or copies of the record. The seller and the scrap metal that he is selling shall appear together and both must be clearly identifiable. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-23. - Exemptions. 
The following transactions and materials are exempt from the requirements specified in sections 17½-21 and 17½-22: 
(1)  Any materials purchased from a regulated public utility; 
(2)  Any materials purchased from an original manufacturer of the material or industrially generated scrap; 
(3)  The purchase of recyclable food and beverage containers from any source; except that, for purposes of this exemption, a metal beer keg shall not be considered a recyclable beverage container; 
(4)  Any scrap that is involved in a transaction between dealers or governmental entities; 
(5)  This article shall not apply to a person or entity that does not provide remuneration for scrap metals collected in drop-off curbside containers or at materials recovery sites. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-24. - Records kept two years. 
The information entered in the book or register, as provided in section 17½-21 shall be kept for two (2) years after the date of purchase of the scrap metal, unless otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-25. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided for in section 1-10 of the Code of the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-26. - Presumption. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that metal purchased for the purpose of recycling is a scrap metal. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Sec. 17½-27. - Cumulative of other laws. 
This article is to be interpreted in conjunction with O.C.G.A Title 43, Ch. 43, as cumulative thereof. Nothing in this article shall supersede existing state or federal laws or relieve a scrap metal processor from the necessity of complying with them. The requirements of state or federal laws shall be construed as cumulative of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 1-3-2008) 
Chapter 18 - RAILROADS 

Sec. 18-1. - Responsibility for violations. 
Any person in charge of any passenger or freight train or engine violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 23-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Blocking crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for any street in the city to be blocked by any stopped passenger or freight train or engine for a longer period than five (5) minutes without authority from the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 23-3) 
Sec. 18-3. - Maintenance of crossings, bridges, water conductors. 
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies to keep the street crossings over their tracks level with the tops of the rails by planks or otherwise, and in a safe and convenient condition for vehicles and pedestrians. When the railroad runs under any street so as to make a bridge necessary, it shall be the duty of said company to keep such bridge safe and in good repair at all times. They shall also keep their water conductors sound and large so as to carry off and leave no standing water. Upon failure of any railroad company to comply with this section the agent of said company shall be served with a notice of the defect and, upon the failure to comply herewith within five (5) days, the same shall be remedied by the city at the expense of the company and the costs collected by execution against the company as provided in case of a nuisance. Any company failing after notice to remedy such defect shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 23-5) 
Chapter 19 - SCHOOLS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Name of system. 
The public school system of the city shall be known as "The Dublin Public Schools." 
(Code 1964, § 25-1) 
Secs. 19-2—19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY BOARD OF EDUCATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-1, §§ 2—8, adopted Feb. 4, 1993, and Ord. No. 93-4, adopted March 8, 1993, have been treated as superseding provisions pertaining to the appointed board of education and formerly codified as Art. II, §§ 19-16—19-32. At the editor's discretion, the substantive sections of Ord. No. 93-1 have been codified as §§ 93-16—93-23; and Ord. No. 93-4 which amended the code by providing for the adoption by reference of Act No. 278, Georgia Laws, 1993, has been designated as § 93-24. Prior to supersession Art. II, §§ 19-16—19-32 derived from the following legislation: 

 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 19-16. - Composition; election of members. 
Those members of the board of education of the City of Dublin who are serving as such on December 31, 1992, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such offices shall continue to serve as such members for terms of office which expire December 31, 1993. On and after January 1, 1994, the board of education of the city, shall consist of seven (7) members of whom four (4) shall be elected from education districts described in section 19-17 below; two (2) of whom shall be elected from super-districts described in section 19-17; and one (1) of whom shall be elected at large. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 2(a), 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-17. - Education districts.[2] 
(a)  For purposes of electing members of the board of education, the City of Dublin School District is divided into four (4) education districts. One (1) member of the board shall be elected from each such district. Those districts shall consist of the following described territory of the city school districts: 
Education District 1 
Education District 2 
Education District 3 
Education District 4 
One (1) member of the board shall be elected from each super-district, with Super-District I being comprised of Education District 1 and Education District 2 and Super-District II being comprised of Education District 3 and Education District 4. One (1) member of the board shall be elected at large. 
(b)  For purposes of Georgia Laws 1993, Act No. 6, Section 2(b): 
(1)  The terms "tract," "block," and "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the bureau of the census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State or Georgia; 
(2)  The term "precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct" and means a geographical area designated by O.C.G.A. Title 21, Chapter 2, Article 7, with which all electors vote at one (1) polling place; 
(3)  Whenever the description of any education district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 1990 or subsequent years for the State of Georgia; 
(4)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any education district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 or subsequent years for the State of Georgia shall control; 
(5)  Any part of the City of Dublin school district which is not included in any education district described in Georgia Laws 1993, Act No. 6, Section 2(b) shall be included within that education district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or subsequent years for the State of Georgia; and 
(6)  Any part of the City of Dublin school district which is described in Georgia Laws 1993, Act No. 6, Section 2(b) as being included in a particular education district shall nevertheless not be included within such education district if such part is not contiguous to such education district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that education district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or subsequent years for the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 2(b),(c), 2-4-93) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The territorial descriptions of the four education districts, as described in Georgia Laws 1993, Act No. 6, have not been herein set out but are on file and available for inspection in the city clerk's office. 

Sec. 19-18. - Election—Qualification of members by district. 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. or any other general law. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from an education district, a person must have resided in that district for at least six (6) months immediately prior to qualifying for election thereto; have reached the age of twenty-one (21) years; possess a high school diploma or its equivalency; and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for that office in that district only and not at large. Only electors who are residents of the education district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from an education district, each candidate for such office shall specify the education district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected as a member of the board from an education district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(c)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from Super-District I, a person must have resided in Super-District I for at least six (6) months immediately prior to qualifying for election thereto; have reached the age of twenty-one (21) years; possess a high school diploma or its equivalency; and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for that office in Super-District I only and not at large. Only electors who are residents of Super-District I may vote for a member of the board for Super-District I. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from Super-District I, each candidate for such office shall specify the Super-District for which that person is a candidate. The member of the board who is elected from Super-District I may reside anywhere within the first or second education districts and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for such office in the first and second education districts. The member of the board from Super-District I must continue to reside within the first or second school district during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(d)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from Super-District II, a person must have resided in Super-District II for at least six (6) months prior to qualifying for election thereto; have reached the age of twenty-one (21) years; possess a high school diploma or its equivalency; and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for that office in Super-District II only and not at large. Only electors who are residents of Super-District II may vote for a member of the board for Super-District II. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from Super-District II, each candidate for such office shall specify the Super-District for which that person is a candidate. The member of the board who is elected from Super-District II may reside anywhere within the third and fourth education districts and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for such office in the third and fourth education districts. The member of the board from Super-District II must continue to reside within the third and fourth education districts during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(e)  In order to be elected a member of the board for the at-large post, a person must have resided within the city limits of Dublin for at least six (6) months prior to qualifying for election thereto; have reached the age of twenty-one (21) years; possess a high school diploma or its equivalency; and, must receive a plurality of the votes cast for that office city-wide. All electors of the City of Dublin may vote for the member of the board running for the at-large post. At the time of qualifying for election as an at-large member of the board, each candidate must specify he is qualifying for the at-large post. The board member elected at large may reside anywhere in the city and must receive a plurality of the votes cast for said office. The at-large member must continue to reside in the city during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon be vacant. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 3, 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-19. - Same—Dates and terms of office. 
(a)  The first members of the reconstituted board of education of the City of Dublin shall be elected at a special election which shall be conducted on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993. Those members of the board elected thereto from Education Districts Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 in 1993 shall take office the first day in January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 1995, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those members of the board elected thereto from Education Super-District I, Education Super-District II and at large in 1993 shall take office the first day of January immediately following their election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 1997, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the state-wide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, and shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each. Members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be elected in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 21, Chapter 3, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code" in nonpartisan elections as provided in Code Section 21-3-95 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 4, 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-20. - Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy occurring on or after January 1, 1993, in the membership of the board, whether the vacancy is in the office of chairperson or any other member for any reason other than expiration of term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in Code Section 20-2-54.1 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 5, 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-21. - Compensation of members. 
Members of the board of education of the City of Dublin shall be compensated in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each official meeting with a maximum of two (2) official meetings per month and in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per diem while participating in board-approved training while acting as a board-approved representative or attending a state or national meeting, and shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred. The chairperson of the board shall be compensated in the same amount. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 6, 2-4-93) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the city's instruction, § 19-21 was amended to read as herein set out to conform to Ga. L. 1998, Act. No. 648. 
Sec. 19-22. - Selection of chairperson. 
The chairperson of the board shall be selected from the membership of the board as provided in Code Section 20-2-57 of O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 7, 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-23. - Superintendent; appointment, term. 
(a)  The school superintendent of the City of Dublin school district who is in office on January 1, 1993, or any person filling a vacancy in such office, shall serve out the remainder of that person's term of office and shall be replaced by an appointee of the board of education at the expiration of such term. In the event of a vacancy occurring in that office prior to the expiration of such term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in Code Section 20-2-107 of O.C.G.A. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the term of the school superintendent as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the board of education shall appoint the school superintendent. Unless otherwise provided by general law, the board may provide that the superintendent serve at the pleasure of the board of education or the board may provide the school superintendent with a contract of employment for a fixed term. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the school superintendent shall be subject to all general laws of this state relating to school superintendents. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 8, 2-4-93) 
Sec. 19-24. - Powers and authority. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and the city council and incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein, Act No. 278, Georgia Laws, 1993, for the purpose of providing for the elected school board to be a body corporate and politic with authority to purchase, acquire, lease, condemn and hold real estate in that name; acquire property by exercise of eminent domain; exercise fiscal independence and taxing authority; and for other purposes as set forth in such act. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, 3-8-93) 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. II of this chapter. 
Chapter 19½ - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10, adopted Nov. 7, 2013, amended Ch. 19½ in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19½, §§ 19½-1—19½-9, was entitled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control", and derived from: Ord. No. 89-20, §§ 1— 10, adopted Nov. 16, 1989; Ord. No. 95-11, §§ 1— 9, adopted Aug. 17, 1995; Ord. No. 01-06, adopted June 21, 2001. 
Cross reference— Building and construction, Ch. 6; planning and zoning, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 

Sec. 19½-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "City of Dublin Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 19½-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) per cent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) per cent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 19½-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this subsection, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 2-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", (manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 19½-4(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections(c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-5(6), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Dublin without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 19½-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 19½-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 19½-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 19½-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Dublin will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The City of Dublin shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 19½-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4), and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Dublin within ten (10) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Laurens County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Sec. 19½-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 23 rd day of October, 2013. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, 11-7-2013) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority over streets, alleys, public ways, § 11(e). 
Cross reference— Engineering standards and specifications adopted, § 2-3; signs, banners across streets, § 3-2; marking advertisements on streets, sidewalks, § 3-4; civic, etc., signs in public rights-of-way, § 3-5; planning and zoning, Ch. 17; traffic, Ch. 23; riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 23-5; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference— Obstructions in public streets, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-304; franchises for use of streets, § 69-310(e); control of streets, § 59-313. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Interfering with street employees. 
Any person who shall interfere with city employees while at work on the streets or public works or shall hinder or annoy them in their work upon the streets or public works of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-2) 
Sec. 20-2. - Taking soil or other matter from public places; changing streets, sidewalks. 
No person shall dig, scrape up or carry away gravel, dirt, earth, rocks or sand from any street, land, sidewalk, square or park of the city or make any changes in the sidewalks or streets without permission of the street superintendent. 
(Code 1964, § 26-3) 
Sec. 20-3. - Numbering buildings. 
The building official shall promulgate and maintain a plan for the numbering of buildings in the city, and all buildings shall be numbered in accordance therewith. 
(1)  The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any new building until the assigned number is attached to the building. 
(2)  All property owners of existing buildings upon adoption of this amendment will post their building number within sixty (60) days. Failure to post the assigned number within fifteen (15) days, after notification by the inspection department, will constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-5; Ord. No. 81-4, 2-5-81) 
Sec. 20-4. - Driveway and encroachment control. 
Prior to the construction of any driveway or other encroachment upon the right-of-way to any public street within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin, Georgia, a permit for the same shall be obtained from the City of Dublin engineering department. The applicant shall submit an application on a form developed and approved by the city engineer and shall pay an application fee in an amount set by the city engineer with the approval of the city manager. The specifications for any and all driveways and encroachments upon the right-of-way or public streets within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin shall meet, at a minimum, the standard specifications set by the Georgia Department of Transportation, and any other specifications required by the city engineer, or his/her designee, as may be dictated by the location of the proposed driveway or encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 10-19-2017) 
Secs. 20-5—20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 20-16. - Obstructions generally. 
No person shall obstruct the public streets, squares, sidewalks or crossings in the city; provided, any person actually constructing or repairing any building or preparing to do so may obtain permission from the building official or superintendent of streets to use a street or sidewalk temporarily for storage of building material or for other purposes, provided that he shall conform to any requirements of the building official and the superintendent of streets in the premises. 
(Code 1964, § 26-16) 
Sec. 20-17. - Lights required at obstructions, excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is responsible for any obstruction of any kind or any ditch or excavation that would be likely to cause an accident on or near any street or sidewalk of the city to fail to place good and sufficient lights and warning devices at or on such obstruction or excavation. 
(Code 1964, § 26-17) 
Sec. 20-18. - Structures encroaching on streets, sidewalks. 
No person shall construct, have constructed, keep, have or maintain any fence, house, steps or other structure, or any shrubbery, so as to intrude on any street, sidewalk or right-of-way of the city. The city manager or street superintendent shall immediately remove said intrusion at the expense of the owner of the property from which the same extends, and the cost of the same shall be collected against the owner as in case of nuisances. 
(Code 1964, § 26-18) 
Sec. 20-19. - Display, sale of goods. 
No person shall use any portion of the streets or sidewalks for the purpose of displaying or selling goods, merchandise or wares of any description, unless, prior thereto, said person shall have made application to and secured approval from the city manager. Any such application shall set forth the exact period of time and the exact place where any such proposed display or sale is to take place. 
(Ord. No. 76-12, § 26-19, 6-7-76) 
Sec. 20-20. - Glass, nails, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, leave or abandon on any street or sidewalk in the city any glass bottle, broken glass or crockery of any kind, nails, tacks, brickbats, or any article or object liable to injure or puncture the tires of vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 26-20) 
Sec. 20-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, adopted June 7, 2007, repealed § 20-21, which pertained to regulation of utility poles and derived from Code 1964, § 26-26. 
Secs. 20-22—20-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses, Ch. 14; traffic, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 20-33. - Permit required. 
In order to provide for the orderly ingress and egress of citizens through and upon the streets of the city, all parades, demonstrations or public addresses on the streets are hereby prohibited except with the written permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 26-21) 
Sec. 20-34. - Application—Required. 
A person seeking a parade permit as required by the provisions of this article shall make application therefor to the city manager on forms provided for such purpose. 
Sec. 20-35. - Same—Filing period. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than five (5) days before the date on which the parade is to be held. 
Sec. 20-36. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of the article. 
Sec. 20-37. - Compliance with law. 
A permittee under the provisions of this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable provisions of this Code, laws and ordinances. 
Sec. 20-38. - Possession. 
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
Sec. 20-39. - Revocation. 
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
Sec. 20-40. - Assemblages obstructing streets, public places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble in a crowd so as to in any manner obstruct the free passage of the streets, sidewalks, public ways and public grounds in the city. Each person forming a part of such assemblage, after notice by any duly constituted law officer having jurisdiction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-22) 
Sec. 20-41. - Walking or assembling on city hall lawn prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to walk on or over, or to assemble in a crowd, on the grass or grass area located in front of the city hall in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1964, § 26-22.1) 
Secs. 20-42—20-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-53. - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and circumstances not regulated or covered by division 2 of this article, relating to underground utility installations. 
(Code 1964, § 26-37) 
Sec. 20-54. - Permit required. 
Any person desiring to excavate or open any street, sidewalk or other public way for any purpose shall first obtain a permit in writing from the city engineer. The city engineer shall specify the streets, sidewalks and public ways and the portions thereof which are to be excavated and the length of time for which such permit is granted. 
(Code 1964, § 26-38) 
Sec. 20-55. - Bond. 
No person shall excavate any street, sidewalk or public place for any purpose until said person has executed a bond with good security to be approved by the city, conditioned to pay the city any damages it may sustain by reason of said excavation. 
(Code 1964, § 26-39) 
Sec. 20-56. - Deposit. 
Any person desiring to excavate or open any street, sidewalk or other public way which has been paved or otherwise permanently improved shall deposit with the city engineer such sum as, in the judgment of the city engineer, is sufficient to cover the cost of replacing said permanent improvements. The balance in excess of that required to cover said costs shall be returned when the work is completed. All backfilling shall be supervised by the city engineer. 
(Code 1964, § 26-40) 
Sec. 20-57. - Requirements of city engineer. 
Any person making an excavation or opening in any street, sidewalks or other public way shall fully comply with the requirements, specifications and directions of the city engineer. The city engineer is hereby authorized to impose reasonable requirements to protect the public and the city. Said requirements may include, but are not limited to, the manner of making the excavation, the times when work may be done, the safety precautions to be taken, the manner of backfilling and tamping and the manner of replacing the surface. 
(Code 1964, § 26-41) 
Secs. 20-58—20-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, adopted June 7, 2007, repealed div. 2, §§ 20-65—20-70, which pertained to underground utility installations and derived from Code 1964, §§ 26-52—26-57. 

Secs. 20-65—20-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for public works, improvements, § 11(k); to levy assessments for improvements, § 11(1); street improvement assessments, § 102. 

Sec. 20-82. - Determination to make by mayor and board of aldermen. 
The mayor and the board of aldermen shall upon its own motion, discuss and determine whether, when and what improvements, extensions, etc., shall be made to the streets, curbing, gutters and on-site drainage system in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-68) 
Sec. 20-83. - Publication of notice; hearing. 
Upon a determination by the mayor and board of aldermen that said improvements or extensions should be made within any particular area, the mayor and board of aldermen shall cause to be published for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements of Laurens County are published, advertisements setting forth fully and completely any number of streets or any part or parts thereof to be so improved and setting forth the date of the regularly scheduled meeting at which any interested person may appear to voice objections. After hearing such objection or discussion as the interested public may desire to present to the mayor and board of aldermen, the mayor and board of aldermen shall proceed to a final determination as to improvements to be made. 
(Code 1964, § 26-69) 
Sec. 20-84. - Determination to make on petition of property owners. 
If the owner of a majority of the lineal feet of the frontage of the land liable to assessment, or a numerical majority of the owners of such property as would be liable to assessment for such improvement shall petition the mayor and board of aldermen for such improvement, then such request shall be placed upon the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen. At said meeting, the mayor and board of aldermen shall consider such presentations for and against said request as interested parties shall care to present and upon consideration of these presentations, the mayor and board of aldermen shall determine whether or not said improvements shall be made. Such a request is advisory only to the mayor and board of aldermen and the mayor and board of aldermen shall have absolute discretion as to whether said improvements shall be made or not. 
(Code 1964, § 26-70) 
Sec. 20-85. - Determination and levy of assessments. 
(a)  The amount of assessment for paving assessed against each piece of real estate shall be determined by a board of appraisers, and in no case shall said assessment be greater than a pro rata share of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total cost of said improvement, one-third ( 1/3 ) to be assessed against the abutting property owner on one side of the street and one-third ( 1/3 ) against the owner on the opposite side of the street; provided, that in the case of sidewalk repairs, not exceeding two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the cost thereof may be assessed against the property abutting the sidewalk. 
(b)  The amount of assessment for paving, curb, and gutter assessed against each piece of real estate shall be determined by a board of appraisers, and in no case shall said assessment be greater than a pro rata share of one-half (½) of the total cost of said improvements, one-fourth (¼) to be assessed against the abutting property owner on one side of the street and one-fourth (¼) against the owner on the opposite side of the street; provided, that in the case of sidewalk repairs, not exceeding one-half (½) of the cost thereof may be assessed against the property abutting the sidewalk. 
(1)  The city clerk shall, upon completion of the improvements under consideration, provide the board of appraisers with an account of all expenses incurred by the city incident to said improvements. This includes any and all contractual obligations, equipment, services, material, engineering, etc. Then the mayor and board of aldermen shall appoint a board of appraisers consisting of three (3) members to appraise and apportion the costs and expenses of said improvements to the several tracts of land abutting on said improvement. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days from the date of the resolution, said board of appraisers shall file with the city clerk a written report of the appraisal and the assessment and costs upon the several lots or tracts of land abutting said improvement. 
(3)  When said report shall have been filed, the mayor and board of aldermen shall designate a regular meeting of their body for the hearing of any complaints or objections that may be made concerning said appraisals, apportionment and assessment by any person interested said notice shall be published by the city clerk once a week for two (2) weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. The time fixed for said hearing shall be not less than five (5), nor more than sixteen (16) days from the date of the last publication. The mayor and board of aldermen at said session shall have the power and it shall be its duty to review and correct said appraisal, apportionment and assessment and to hear objections to the same whether as made by the board of appraisers or as corrected by the mayor and board of aldermen. The mayor and board of aldermen shall, by ordinance, fix the assessments in accordance with said appraisal and apportionment as so confirmed against the several tracts of land liable therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-71; Ord. No. 79-9, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-79) 
Sec. 20-86. - Due date and payment of assessments. 
Assessments in conformity with said appraisal and apportionment as confirmed by the mayor and board of aldermen shall be payable to the city in cash within thirty (30) days from the date of billing from the city clerk, without interest. In the event the owner of the land so assessed shall, within thirty (30) days of billing from the city clerk making the assessment final, file with the city clerk his written request asking that the assessment be payable in installments, the same shall thereupon be and become payable in installments in either of the following methods, as requested by the land owner: the same shall thereupon be and become payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments over the period of one year, and the rate of nine (9) per cent interest on the unpaid balance shall be charged; or the same shall thereupon be and become payable in twenty-four (24) monthly installments over the period of two (2) years, the rate of nine (9) per cent interest on the unpaid balance shall be charged. Said payment of principle and interest by either method elected shall be made to the city clerk monthly, until total amount due is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 69-15, § 26-72, 7-7-69) 
Sec. 20-87. - Sole discretion of mayor and aldermen. 
All improvements hereinbefore referred to shall be made or not, at the sole discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1964, § 26-73) 
Sec. 20-88. - Policy for repair of sidewalks. 
The city hereby adopts the following policy pertaining to the replacement or repair of previously established sidewalks: 
(1)  Petition required; owner to furnish concrete. The owner of the abutting property to the sidewalk shall petition the city manager for the repair of said sidewalk. Upon approval by the city manager, the owner of said property shall supply to the city ready-mix concrete, or in the alternative, adequate crews and material for the mixing of cement, and same shall be delivered or mixed at the location proposed for its use. 
(2)  City to do work. The city shall provide the labor required to excavate, remove the broken sidewalk, build such forms as shall be required, furnishing material for the building of such forms, and shall furnish the general supervision required for efficient replacement of said sidewalks. 
(3)  City manager's decision final. The city manager's decision for the replacement or rebuilding of such sidewalks shall be final and binding upon the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-74) 
Sec. 20-89. - Permit to construct curbing, gutters, drains for dedication to public use. 
(a)  Required. All persons desiring to construct curbing, gutters, and drains which are dedicated to public use or shall be dedicated to public use shall first obtain from the building inspector a permit to construct such street, curbing, gutters and drains. 
(b)  Application for permit. Prior to the issuance of such permit the person or persons seeking such permits shall file with the building inspector an application showing the exact location of the streets, curbing, gutters or drains to be constructed and there shall be attached to such application a certificate from the city manager stating that the specifications of the construction to be made have been filed with and approved by the city manager. 
(c)  Failure to obtain permit; penalty. Any streets, curbing, gutters or drains constructed by private individuals without first having obtained such permit shall be deemed not acceptable for dedication to public use and the city shall be precluded from accepting same and from accepting responsibility of maintenance of same. Any person or persons violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-75) 
Secs. 20-90—20-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY ACCOMODATION 

Sec. 20-100. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city to install, construct, maintain, renew, remove or relocate any utility in, on, along, over or under any property of the city (including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, roads, sidewalks or easements), without a utility permit from the City of Dublin Engineering Department. 
(b)  Utility permits must be obtained from the city engineer (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the City of Dublin Engineering Department. 
(c)  Fees. Fees shall be determined by the city manager, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the city engineer and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 20-101. - Utility accommodations manual adopted. 
(a)  The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (Permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time (referred to hereinafter as "the manual"), is adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modifications contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city engineer, or his designee, and open for public inspection. 
(b)  References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Dublin municipal equivalents. The manual, is amended in order to equate state definitions and provisions with their appropriate and equivalent city counterparts, such that a policy shall be implemented to reflect the intent and effect of the state right-of-way policy as it would logically apply to the City of Dublin's rights-of-way including, but not limited to the following: 
Substitutions: 
Commissioner: City manager. 
Department: City of Dublin Engineering Department. 
District engineer: City engineer. 
Highway: Any road that is part of the city road system. 
State: City of Dublin. 
State bridge and structural design engineer: City engineer. 
State highway (chief) engineer: City engineer. 
State utilities engineer: City engineer. 
Utility: All privately, publicly or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting or distributing any form of matter or energy (including, but not limited to: Communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems) and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, provider, service, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the authority to interpret and administer the manual. Ambiguities may be caused by the application to the City of Dublin rules that were written for regulation of matters governed by the department of transportation. Any person who is unsure as to how the manual applies to a specific situation shall request in writing an interpretation from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 20-102—20-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TELEPHONE FRANCHISES 

Sec. 20-200. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) per cent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1(b)(8), (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) per cent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) per cent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 2, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 20-201. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager or his designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day to day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq., and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 3, 4-2-2009) 
Secs. 20-202—20-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 20-300. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for regulation of sidewalk cafes operated by qualified restaurants on public sidewalks, and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to a viable and attractive commercial and pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the interest of the city and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the words below shall have the following meaning: 
City manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Dublin and those to whom he delegates or assigns duties under this section, including but not limited to the Dublin Downtown Development Authority. 
Operator or permittee shall mean the person operating the restaurant with its associated sidewalk cafe, and shall include, but not be limited to, an owner, lessor, renter or manager. 
Person shall mean both natural persons, and legal persons such as corporations, partnerships or LLC's. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-302. - Qualifications. 
The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a "restaurant" as defined in the City of Dublin Code of Ordinances section 4-34. No permit is required, however, the use of the sidewalk to operate a sidewalk cafe is a privilege, not a right, and any person who violates the conditions of this article may be forbidden to operate a sidewalk cafe after notice and a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-303. - Temporary closing of sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes may be ordered closed temporarily by the City of Dublin whenever deemed necessary in the sole discretion of the city, whenever the area may be needed for a public purpose, including but not limited to, construction, maintenance, public health, safety or welfare, emergencies, and public events such as parades or street parties. 
(b)  The city may order the immediate removal or relocation of all, or parts of, a sidewalk cafe in emergency situations or for safety considerations, without notice. The city and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures relocated during emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-304. - Restrictions on use of sidewalks. 
(a)  In no event shall the uses permitted by this division reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five (5) feet in width. Additionally, contiguous pedestrian flow must be maintained between two (2) or more adjacent sidewalk cafes. The city may designate portions of the sidewalk which must not be obstructed under any circumstance, and may restrict usage in any manner deemed necessary by the city. 
(b)  Nothing will be placed within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk or handicapped corner curb cut. 
(d)  The city reserves the right of access to all portions of the sidewalk included in areas permitted for the purposes of sidewalk repair or other necessary purposes. 
(e)  Sidewalk cafe operators shall maintain the sidewalk and the curb and gutter immediately adjacent to it in a clean and safe condition. Full daily cleaning is required. Refuse shall not be disposed of in the city's sidewalk trash receptacles. The area shall be kept clear of all debris. The operator shall also be responsible for cleaning the ground or floor surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located and the gutter area immediately adjacent to the sidewalk cafe. Such cleaning shall include pressure cleaning. If the area is not maintained in a neat and orderly appearance after notice the city may then take steps necessary to place the property in a neat and clean order and charge the operator with the reasonable cost of cleaning or repairs. Such action by the city does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such cleaning or repairs were completed in good faith. 
(f)  No tables, chairs, or any other parts of sidewalk cafes shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk in or near the permitted area. 
(g)  Only the area in front of a restaurant, as defined by projecting its interior width outward perpendicular to the street to a point at which it intersects the roadway (or within the sidewalk frontage of the building where the validly licensed restaurant is located provided that written approval is supplied by the building owner), can be used by the restaurant. Placement of tables and chairs will be permitted in areas more than ten (10) feet from the front of the building only when city manager determines it is in the best interest of the public to permit such placement. All tables and chairs must be of a design, material, and specification suitable for outside dining. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-305 - Insurance prerequisite. 
(a)  The operator of a sidewalk cafe agrees to, and does by its operation of a sidewalk cafe, indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of operator's activity on the demised premises. The operator shall provide indemnification to the city in writing on a form provided by the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk cafe, unless the applicant shall furnish in a form acceptable to the city manager evidence of commercial general liability insurance, and alcohol license liability insurance if serving alcohol, naming the city as a co-insured party and insuring the city against any liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section. The coverage shall not be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence. 
(c)  It shall not be lawful to operate a sidewalk cafe at any time the insurance required by this section is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-306. - Revocation. 
The privilege of an operator to use the sidewalk of the City of Dublin may be revoked at any time by written notice to be served on the operator; such service to be by certified mail or personal service. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the permittee shall have ten (10) days to appeal such revocation to the board of zoning appeals, whose decision after notice and hearing as required by the governing board of zoning appeals section of this Code shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-307. - Sale of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafe's. 
Only a properly permitted restaurant with a sidewalk cafe, which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on the premises, may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk cafe, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Alcohol may only be possessed in the sidewalk cafe portion of the restaurant between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Alcohol may not be served in its original container, but must be served in a glass or in clear plastic cups. No bottles or cans are allowed. 
(3)  Only a single serving of alcohol may be in possession of any patron. 
(4)  Patrons must be seated while consuming an alcoholic beverage. 
(5)  Patrons may not remove any alcohol from the premises of the restaurant where the alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-308. - Right to limit or deny admission or service. 
Within the designated area of a cafe, the operator holding a permit under this article shall have the right to limit access and occupancy to only bona fide paying customers of that operator's restaurant who are behaving in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 20-309. - Penalties. 
In addition to losing the privilege of operating a sidewalk cafe, any person, firm, corporation or agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor for any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. The performance of any act prohibited by any section or provision of this article, or the failure to perform any act required thereby, shall constitute a violation and an offense hereunder and any person found guilty of a violation of any section or provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Secs. 20-310—20-340. - Reserved. 
Chapter 21 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Property tax, § 6.1; occupation and business taxes, § 6.3. 
Cross reference— Finance generally, § 2-93 et seq.; malt beverages, wine taxes, § 4-46 et seq.; spirituous liquors, excise tax, § 4-46; sales tax on mixed drinks, § 4-58 et seq.; licenses, Ch. 12; sales taxes on natural gas, § 24-133. 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation generally, Ga. Code Ann., § 92-4001 et seq.; limitations on city's right to tax, Ch. 92-41; assessments for improvements by city, § 92-4201; garnishments collection of city taxes, § 92-4301. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 21-1. - Property subject to taxation. 
All real and personal property situated in the city, whether owned by individuals, firms or corporations, resident or nonresident, regardless of whether the same is primarily used outside the city, unless exempt under the laws of the state, shall be subject to such ad valorem tax as may be lawfully levied thereon according to the constitution and laws of the state, and the charter and ordinances of the city, and according to the value of the same as of the first day of January of each year. 
(Code 1964, § 28-1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Against whom charged. 
Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
Sec. 21-3. - Exempted property—Generally. 
The following property shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxation by the city: 
(a)  All public property; 
(b)  All places of religious worship and places of burial; and 
(c)  All buildings used as a college, university, or other seminary of learning. 
(Code 1964, § 28-3) 
Sec. 21-3.1. - Same—Solar energy heating and cooling systems and equipment used in the manufacture thereof. 
There is hereby exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for state, county, municipal or school purposes, all of the value of certain tangible property used in a solar energy heating or cooling system, and all the value of certain tangible property consisting only of machinery and equipment directly used in the manufacture of solar energy heating or cooling systems. For the purposes hereof, solar energy heating or cooling systems shall mean and include all controls, tanks, pumps, heat exchangers, and other equipment used directly and exclusively for the conversion of solar energy for heating or cooling, but shall not include walls, roofs or equipment that would ordinarily be contained in a similar structure not designed or modified to use solar energy for heating or cooling. For the purposes of this exemption, the term "heating" shall also mean and include water heating and drying. This section shall be repealed and shall be null and void effective July 1, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 80-27, 11-6-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-27, adopted Nov. 6, 1980, provided for amendment of the Code but did not specify the manner of codification; hence, its inclusion as § 21-3.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 21-4. - Assessment and fair market value. 
All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation by the city shall be assessed at a percentage of its fair market value, as determined by the board of tax assessors; provided, however, that in no event shall the assessment be at a ratio less than forty (40) per cent. The basis for fair market value shall be one hundred (100) per cent of the fair market valuation determined for the property by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
Sec. 21-5. - Collection; installments; interest. 
(a)  The mayor and city council of the City of Dublin hereby provide for the collection and payment of ad valorem taxes on tangible property, other than motor vehicles, in installments based on the fraction of taxes levied on such property for the preceding tax year. 
(b)  Those taxes payable in installments and based on the current final tax digest, shall be billed on July 1. The first installment on such taxes shall be one-half the entire amount due for the year and shall become due sixty (60) days from the date of billing, and the second installments thereon shall be one-half of the entire amount due for the year and shall be due on December 20. 
(c)  An installment shall become delinquent on the day following its appropriate due date and shall thereupon be subject to a penalty of ten (10) per cent. That part of the entire amount due which is unpaid after December 20 shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of twelve (12) per cent per annum from December 21 until paid. 
(Ord. No. 77-41, § 2, 12-19-77; Ord. No. 81-7, 2-19-81) 
Sec. 21-6. - Failure to pay tax. 
The city may forthwith issue an execution against any taxpayer who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all property of such taxpayer, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
Sec. 21-7. - Time, place, and manner of sale. 
The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city, shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriff's sales for state and county taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 28-22) 
State Law reference— Procedure for sale of property bid in for taxes, § 92-4404 Ga. Code Ann. 
Sec. 21-8. - Sale by parcels. 
When not impractical, all property sold for city taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
Sec. 21-9. - Purchase by city. 
The city treasurer will attend all sales of property for taxes due the city, and in the event there is no bid for the property as much as the tax due thereon, the treasurer shall place a bind for such property for the city and, if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. No property so purchased by the city shall ever be sold by the city except at a public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
(Code 1964, § 28-20) 
Sec. 21-10. - Redemption of property sold for taxes. 
Any taxpayer whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of city taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth in chapter 92-83 of the Georgia Code Annotated and any other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith. 
Sec. 21-11. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosures. 
To provide for an alternative method to nonjudicial tax foreclosure procedures is an effective means of eliminating health and safety hazards by putting certain tax-delinquent properties back on the tax rolls and into productive use. 
Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Chapter 4, Tax Sales, Article 5, Ad Valorem Tax Foreclosure, Sections 48-4-75 through 48-4-81 are hereby adopted as part of the City Code of Dublin, Georgia with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-16, 8-1-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-16, adopted Aug. 1, 1996, repealed and recreated § 21-11 to read as herein set out. Former § 21-11 pertained to an assessment fund as derived from Ord. No. 85-6, §§ 1, 3, adopted Feb. 20, 1985. 
Secs. 21-12—21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-1, §§ 1—9, 11, 12, adopted Jan. 7, 1985, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included herein as Art. II, §§ 21-26—21-36, at the discretion of the editor. To facilitate the inclusion of Ord. No. 85-1 as Art. II, the existing provisions of Ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-10, have been designated Art. I, also at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 21-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
(a)  Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
(b)  Operator. Any person operating a hotel in the City of Dublin, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
(c)  Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
(d)  Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
(e)  Hotel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(f)  Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
(g)  Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(h)  Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten (10) consecutive days next preceding such date. 
(i)  Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(j)  City. The City of Dublin. 
(k)  Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(l)  Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
(m)  Due date. From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 1, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-27. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
Pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 there shall be paid a tax of eight (8) per cent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 2, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-4-87; Ord. No. 05-15, §§ I, II, 11-10-2005) 
State Law reference— Levy and collection of certain excise taxes O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5.2). 
Sec. 21-28. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city, unless exempt under this article, shall collect a tax, in the percentage amount set out in section 21-27 above, of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 3, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-4-87; Ord. No. 05-15, §§ I, II, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 21-29. - Application of tax. 
Taxes collected hereunder shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5.2) and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 4, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 05-15, §§ I, II, 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 21-30. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city, on a form provided by said city. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 21-27, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 5, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-31. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 21-26. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 6, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-32. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one (¾ of 1) per cent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city or designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 7, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-33. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 21-32(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one (¾ of 1) per cent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of the payment. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 8, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-34. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 9, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-35. - Violations. 
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in sections 1-10 or 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin, Georgia. Each such person or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 11, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-36. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time for three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successors' liability. If a purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the city. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three (3) years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground on which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 12, 1-7-85) 
Sec. 21-37. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § II, 11-10-2005) 
Secs. 21-38—21-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-9, adopted Nov. 3, 1994, entirely amended Art. III to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. III, §§ 21-46—21-49, 21-49.1—21-49.6, and 21-50—21-59, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 85-17 adopted Oct. 17, 1985; Ord. No. 90-3, adopted April 4, 1990; Ord. No. 90-23, adopted Nov. 15, 1990; and Ord. No. 92-6, adopted Aug. 3, 1992. 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 12; peddlers, Ch. 17; taxicabs, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 21-46. - Occupation tax required. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Dublin, Georgia, whether with a location in the City of Dublin, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the City of Dublin, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the City of Dublin, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his deputies or to any police officer of said City of Dublin, Georgia, upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-47. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple-line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
Number of employees, fulltime and fulltime equivalent means that the number of employees of a given business is defined as the average number employed during the immediate previous calendar year. "Employee" is defined as an individual who works forty (40) hours per week and receives a W-2 form from an employer. Part-time workers' total hours will be divided by forty (40) to determine the number of "fulltime equivalents." If the total number of employees is fractional, then the total number is to be rounded up to the next whole number to determine the tax amount. The owner and any family members working for the business, whether paid or not, should be included in the count when arriving at the total number of employees. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) per cent or more of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-48. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee shall not be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or re-opening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-3, 1-19-95; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-49. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule: 

 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95; Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-2006) 
Sec. 21-50. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the City of Dublin and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the City of Dublin for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-51. - Dominant business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-52. - The number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-53. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 21-49. 
(2)  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-54. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-55. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for the revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-56. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 of each year, [and] be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 21-63 of this chapter. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the City of Dublin in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) per cent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city marshal and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the City of Dublin, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said registration such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, either or both in the discretion of the court as prescribed in section 1-10 of the official Code of the City of Dublin. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-57. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only employees who work in the local government's jurisdiction will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-58. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless fifty (50) per cent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-59. - Evidence of state registration required, if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-60. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-61. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the City of Dublin after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same, and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the City of Dublin, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-62. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, on the second day of March of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the City of Dublin after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the City of Dublin any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 21-63. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the City of Dublin, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-63. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not exceeding sixty (60) days, either or both, in the discretion of the city judge as prescribed in section 1-10 of the official Code of the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-64. - City marshal; subpoena and arresting powers. 
The City of Dublin and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as city marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 and succeeding years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-65. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-66. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-67. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the said city, at the office of the city marshal on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupational tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) per cent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-68. - When business has more than one location. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return to be furnished by the city marshal. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-69. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the City of Dublin or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or of the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-70. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The revenue collection officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the City of Dublin, Georgia, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the City of Dublin within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the City of Dublin. Adequate records shall be kept in the City of Dublin, Georgia, for examination by the city clerk at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of one hundred twenty-five (125) per cent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for a period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-71. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided, any business tax registration granted by the City of Dublin under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-72. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any person, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in said City of Dublin after the registration for said business has been revoked as above; and any person, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-73. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk of the City of Dublin, Georgia, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) per cent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal of said city upon the property of defendant located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interests and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the charter of said city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by property authority upon an execution issued by the city marshal against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-74. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-75. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-76. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city marshal and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city marshal, chief of police, members of the police department and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the City of Dublin, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-77. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-78. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-79. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-80. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-81. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, be and the same are, hereby repealed effective January 1, 1996. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 95-12, 10-5-95) 
Sec. 21-82. - Attorneys. 
Notwithstanding anything else herein to the contrary, the following special provisions shall apply to attorneys: 
(1)  Attorneys shall pay the tax imposed in arrears, that is, the tax shall be assessed for the preceding year, not the year in which it is paid. The due dates for payment and assessment of penalties shall otherwise apply. 
(2)  No attorney shall be required to register with, or to obtain or display a registration from, the city in order to practice in the city. 
(3)  No criminal sanction imposed by the Code of the City of Dublin for the non-payment of the occupation tax shall apply to attorneys. The tax and any penalties for non-payment may be collected as otherwise set out herein. No term of imprisonment may be imposed on any attorney for non-payment. 
(4)  No attorney may be prevented from practicing his profession in the City of Dublin due to failure to pay the tax. Any attorney who, due to indigence, cannot practice law due to the requirement that he pay the occupation tax herein imposed may be exempted there from upon filing with the city a pauper's affidavit in a form prescribed by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-2006) 
ARTICLE IV. - BLIGHT TAX 

Sec. 21-100. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of Dublin recognizes the existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition. Such properties increase the need for governmental services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. The City of Dublin finds the rehabilitation of blighted properties decreases the need for such government services and the costs to the city's taxpayers. 
In furtherance of the city's objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, the mayor and council, in the exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations in Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated and continues to designate those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meaning set out below: 
(1)  Blighted property , blighted , or blight means any urbanized or developed property that: 
a.  Presents two (2) or more of the following conditions: 
1.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structures; 
2.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
3.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe that the Governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to the property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
4.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 USC 9601, et. seq. or environmental contamination to the extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
5.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
6.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one (1) year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
b.  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime in the immediate proximity of the property; 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no property shall be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
(2)  Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of building sand structures unfit for human habitation. 
(4)  Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Dublin, a Georgia Municipal Corporation. 
(5)  Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(6)  Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
(7)  Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016) 
Sec. 21-101. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of ten (10.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate than that generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one (1) or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Subject to the time limitations provided in section 21-103(f), such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted and shall be due and payable as taxes are due and payable to the City of Dublin. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall be placed in the general fund of the City of Dublin. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016; Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 10-5-2017) 
Sec. 21-102. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  A request may be made by a public officer or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that the building, structure, or property meets the criteria described in section 21-100(b)(1). 
(2)  An investigation or inspection by a public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in section 21-100(b)(1). 
(3)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subjection (1) and (2) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of the inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(4)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation as provided herein. 
(5)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Laurens County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that the real property in question has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then won the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person(s) of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. A written request for a hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. In the event a hearing is not requested within thirty (30) days as provided herein, the blighted property shall become subject to the increased taxation provided for herein. The public officer shall give written notice to the city clerk of such failure to request a hearing within the time limit. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a request for a hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten (10) business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer, and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the legal organ of Laurens County, at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the persons(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of the municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the municipal court judge shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the city clerk. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the municipal court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Laurens County for a writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of the issuance and filing of the court's written determination. 
(f)  Any property determined to be blighted, either by the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of notice by the property owner from the public officer or by order of the court, on or after August 1st shall not be subject to the increased taxation provided herein until the following taxable year. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016; Ord. No. 17-15, §§ 2, 3, 4, 10-5-2017) 
Sec. 21-103. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city manager, or his designee, which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to articles I through III, of chapter 13, "Nuisances", of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Dublin, Georgia. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the city clerk of the City of Dublin. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the chief building inspector, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five (5) acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(d)  (1)  Any written determination by the public officer that the property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition which is dated on or before the due date of the property tax bill for the property in question shall relieve the property owner of the increased taxation rate for that bill. Any written determination by the public officer that the property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition which is dated after the due date of the property tax bill for the property in question shall not relieve the property owner of the increased taxation rate for that bill. 
(2)  If a property owner is dissatisfied with the determination made by the public officer that the property continues to remain in a blighted condition, the property owner may petition the Municipal Court of the City of Dublin for a hearing regarding the same. The petition must identify the property in question, the name of the property owner, the individual bringing the petition on behalf of the property owner, if any, and a certification that the property is no longer being maintained in a blighted condition as defined herein. The petition must be verified by the petitioner and submitted to the Municipal Court Clerk along with a fifty dollar ($50.00) filing fee. The Municipal Court shall cause a hearing to be scheduled and notice served on the petitioner, public officer, and the city attorney of the date of the hearing, which is to be scheduled within sixty (60) days of the date the petition is filed. Said hearing may be continued by the municipal court judge for good cause shown. During the pendency of any petition as provided in this subsection (d)(2), the increased taxation amount shall not be subject to any late fees or penalties, however, all regular ad valorem taxes due the City of Dublin (the base amount) shall be paid timely according to the tax notice and subject to late fees and penalties. The municipal court judge shall issue an order, after holding a hearing, with the Judge's determination as to whether the property is being maintained in a blighted condition, by a preponderance of the evidence. The order shall be served on the petitioner, public officer, city attorney, and city clerk. If the municipal court judge determines the property is no longer being maintained in a blighted condition, the property shall not be subject to the increased taxation as required herein. If the municipal court judge determines the property continues to be maintained in a blighted condition, the increased tax amount shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the filing of the order with such determination. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016; Ord. No. 17-15, § 5, 10-5-2017) 
Sec. 21-104. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 21-102, "Identification of blighted property", of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or portion thereof equaling one (1) year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four (4) successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016) 
Sec. 21-105. - Notice to city clerk. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the city clerk of the City of Dublin in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Lauren County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the city clerk to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, 12-1-2016) 
Chapter 22 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles for hire, generally, Ga. Code Ann., § 68-701 et seq. 
Cross reference— Occupation tax, § 21-46 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "taxicab" shall mean an automobile hauling passengers for fare or hire, and shall include conveyances commonly known as taxis, jitneys, cabs and hacks. 
(Code 1964, § 30-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Chapters applicable despite license fee exemption. 
Any person operating a taxicab who is or may be exempt for any cause from the payment of a license fee shall nevertheless be subject to each and every provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 30-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Rates to be displayed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab within the city without having displayed in such vehicle a card showing the rates to be charged for transportation. Said card shall show the rates to be charged for each number of passengers from one passenger to and including the maximum number of passengers to be hauled in said vehicle at one time, and shall show the rates to be charged for different distances or zones in the city. Said card shall first be approved by the chief of police, who shall not approve it unless and until it contains the information required herein and has such information plainly printed thereon in type of such size and clarity as to be easily read by anyone with normal vision. Said card shall at all times remain conspicuously posted in the vehicle so as to be visible to the passengers therein. 
(Code 1964, § 30-12) 
Sec. 22-4. - Designation of taxicabs. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door and on the rear of the vehicle, in painted letters not less than three (3) inches high, the name of the company or individual owning or operating the vehicle and the word "taxicab," and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the chief of police. 
(b)  There shall also be painted on each side and on the rear of every taxicab a number, such number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other taxicab in the municipality. The number shall be assigned to the taxicab and the user thereof by the chief of police and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of such officer. 
(c)  A register of the name of each person owning or operating a taxicab in the city shall be kept by the city clerk, and such register shall contain for each owner or operator the description, make of car, and number assigned to the vehicle by the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 30-13) 
Sec. 22-5. - Prohibitions of drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers. 
(Code 1964, § 30-17) 
Sec. 22-6. - Prohibited solicitation. 
No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice, or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
Sec. 22-7. - Receipt, discharge of passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
Sec. 22-8. - Cruising. 
No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the chief of police. Such areas and times shall only be designated when said officer finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
Sec. 22-9. - Solicitation of other common carrier passengers prohibited. 
No driver, owner, or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established route of any other common carrier. 
Sec. 22-10. - Restrictions on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the seating capacity of his vehicle as stated in the inspection certificate issued by the police department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
Sec. 22-11. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged. 
Secs. 22-12—22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 22-23. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued for engaging in the taxicab business, the applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk an indemnity bond for each vehicle authorized in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damages resulting from any one accident. Said bond or bonds shall be executed by the applicant, as principal, and two (2) sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state, and shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of the applicant, his servants, or agents. 
(b)  The city council may in its discretion allow the applicant to file, in lieu of a bond or bonds, a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, provided that such policy conforms to the provisions of this section relating to bonds. 
(Code 1964, § 30-4) 
Sec. 22-24. - License to show business name. 
Each license taken out for the operation of a taxicab business shall be in the name of a firm or company, or if in the name of an individual it shall have the trade name shown on the receipt. 
(Code 1964, § 30-3) 
Secs. 22-25—22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 22-36. - Required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of this municipality, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a valid motor vehicle driver's license, issued by the state, and a valid taxicab driver's permit issued by this city. 
Sec. 22-37. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be in writing, addressed to the chief of police, and filed with the city clerk. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of four (4) residents of the city who have known the applicant and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant; 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant; and 
(4)  A concise history of his employment. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(Code 1964, § 30-5) 
Sec. 22-38. - Police investigation of applicant. 
The chief of police shall require an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit. Such investigation shall be made to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant, as well as the applicant's knowledge of the city and all traffic regulations therein. A report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application and forwarded to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1964, §§ 30-6, 30-8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Fingerprinting required. 
Each and every driver of a taxicab shall, before driving such vehicle, report to the chief of police for the purpose of fingerprinting and shall permit the chief of police to obtain a complete set of his fingerprints. 
(Code 1964, § 30-7) 
Sec. 22-40. - Issuance. 
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's permit, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall be signed by said chief of police, bear the corporate seal of the city, and set forth the name, address, age, and signature of the applicant. The chief of police shall procure or cause to be procured two (2) photographs of such applicant, one of such photographs to be retained by the chief of police in the files of the police department and the other to be attached to the taxicab driver's permit. 
Sec. 22-41. - Display. 
Every taxicab driver who obtains a permit under the provisions of this article shall post his taxicab driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1964, § 30-11) 
Sec. 22-42. - Compliance with law. 
Every driver who obtains a permit under the provisions of this article shall comply with all city, state, and federal laws. 
Sec. 22-43. - Operators changing employment. 
Upon any driver being discharged or separated from the service of the owner or operator that registered him, the owner or operator shall immediately report same to the chief of police, upon said driver being re-employed by another person engaged in the same type of business in the city, said person, whether owner or operator, shall report the same to the chief of police. In such case, the chief of police shall make a transfer on the card issued to the driver showing his present employment, and for such transfer a charge of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be made. All sums collected in such manner shall be delivered to the city clerk and credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 30-10) 
Sec. 22-44. - Suspension, revocation. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the mayor and board of aldermen for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1964, § 30-9) 
Chapter 23 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned property, § 13-19 et seq.; noise provisions re motor vehicles, § 14-35; motor vehicles in parks, § 15-1; railroads, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; parades, § 20-33 et seq.; taxicabs, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. Title 40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 40, Ch. 6, §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376 of that chapter known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road" and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 75-15, § 1, 4-7-75; Ord. No. 89-4, § 1, 2-2-89) 
Sec. 23-2. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 75-15, § 2, 4-7-75) 
Sec. 23-3. - Powers and duties of police and fire officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1964, § 16-5) 
Sec. 23-4. - Temporary police regulations authorized. 
In cases where the traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested or where large numbers of vehicles or people are assembled, the police may make temporary rules regulating traffic in such congested districts and any person, who shall refuse to comply with such regulations after being warned of said temporary traffic regulations by a police officer of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 16-7) 
Sec. 23-5. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in a business district of the city in such a manner to create or constitute a danger or hazard to pedestrians. 
(Code 1964, § 16-9) 
Sec. 23-6. - Design, construction and equipment for vehicles. 
All vehicles operated within the city shall comply with all requirements of the laws of this state relating to design, construction, mechanical condition, equipment and safety devices. 
(Code 1964, § 16-11) 
State Law reference— Equipment required, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq. 
Secs. 23-7—23-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 

Sec. 23-18. - Dangerous operation of vehicle. 
No driver of any motor vehicle shall operate the vehicle upon the public streets, highways, public or private driveways, airport runways, or public or private parking lots, in such a manner as to create a danger to persons or property by intentionally and unnecessarily causing the vehicle to move in a zig zag or circular course, or to gyrate or spin around, except to avoid a collision or injury or damage. 
(Ord. No. 72-4, 1-17-72) 
Sec. 23-19. - U-turns generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, commonly known as making a U-turn, on any street in a business district. It shall be unlawful to make such a turn at any other location in the city except at intersections controlled by official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1964, § 16-46) 
Sec. 23-20. - Driving through processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as a procession. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1964, § 16-52) 
Sec. 23-21. - Speed limits. 
The maximum speed limit in the city shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour; provided that the mayor and city council, in compliance with state law, may prescribe maximum speed limits greater or less than thirty-five (35) miles per hour and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in excess of such limits. No such speed limit shall be effective unless and until appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 16-26) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to set speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-9. 
Secs. 23-22—23-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, DEVICES 

Sec. 23-33. - Sign posting authority. 
The chief of police shall have the power to designate, lay off and indicate, with the approval of the city council, by appropriate signs and markings: Parking spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, parking meter zones, zones in which vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb, loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above, crosswalks, truck routes, through streets, stop streets and intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic, play streets, bus stops and taxicab stands. He shall also have the power to designate and indicate, with the approval of the city council, intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals, intersections at which left turns and/or right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited, and intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16-44, 16-67, 16-69, 16-76, 16-77) 
Sec. 23-34. - Installation of devices. 
Whenever any designation is made in accord with this article, the chief of police shall erect and install such signs, markings, lines, signals and other traffic-control devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate such designation and to put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition resulting from such designation. 
Sec. 23-35. - Obedience to devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a vehicle upon the streets of the city contrary to any signs, signals or other traffic-control devices that are placed upon the streets for the purpose of directing traffic, except upon direction of a police officer and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 23-36. - Necessity of signs. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof. 
Sec. 23-37. - Moving or damaging devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any sign, signal or other traffic-control device placed upon the streets of the city. 
Sec. 23-38. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected in the city prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
Secs. 23-39—23-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 

Sec. 23-50. - Vehicles obstructing streets. 
No vehicle shall so occupy any street as to obstruct traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 16-71) 
Sec. 23-51. - Storing, repairing vehicles on streets, sidewalks. 
Garages, stables, repair shops, filling stations, express companies and other such places of business shall not leave autos parked on the streets for more than sixty (60) minutes at any time, day or night, and all work to be done on vehicles must be carried on inside the place of business. No such place of business shall keep any vehicle on a sidewalk. 
(Code 1964, § 16-78) 
Sec. 23-52. - Overnight parking in business districts. 
No vehicle shall be left parked overnight in any block containing only nonresidential uses. 
(Code 1964, § 16-80) 
Sec. 23-53. - Abandoned vehicles. 
Any vehicle left parked on a street in the city for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours may be impounded in the same manner as for other parking violations. 
(Code 1964, § 16-81) 
Sec. 23-54. - Parking at businesses after closing. 
It shall be unlawful and punishable for any person to remain upon the premises or parking areas of any business while said business is closed, without the consent of the owner of said business; provided that in parking areas which are common to more than one (1) business, such conduct shall be unlawful only while all of the businesses are closed. 
(Ord. No. 77-5, § 1, 2-21-77) 
Sec. 23-55. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-29(c), the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-29(a) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 87-5, § 1, 4-9-87) 
Sec 23-55.5. - Truck parking in residential zones. 
In all residential zoning districts, the parking of tractor-trailer trucks, either the tractor or trailer, whether coupled or uncoupled, is prohibited on public or private property. Tractor-trailer trucks are those commonly called a "semi", one (1) unit, the tractor, being the power unit and another unit, the semitrailer, carrying the freight, and having a GVW of thirty-three thousand (33,000) pounds or greater. The temporary parking of a commercial vehicle that is parked temporarily in conjunction with a commercial service, sale or delivery is permitted. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to section 1-10 of this Code. Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 3-5-2009) 
ARTICLE V. - TIME CONTROLLED PARKING ZONES (UNMETERED) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-56. - Unmetered parking. 
(a)  There shall be unmetered, time-controlled parking permitted in the downtown area of the city. The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to establish immediately unmetered, time-controlled parking zones in the downtown district. 
(b)  The chief of police is additionally authorized and directed to established from time to time hereafter, as traffic conditions require, additional unmetered, time-controlled parking zones. 
(c)  The chief of police shall cause unmetered, time-controlled parking spaces to be designated as hereinafter provided, and shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in these zones to be a period not to exceed two (2) hours. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-57. - Signs shall be posted. 
The city shall cause notices to be posted in the unmetered, time-controlled parking zones indicating the legal "free" parking time as established by this article in the downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-58. - Parking lines and number identification for unmetered parking spaces. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is instructed to mark off and identify all unmetered parking spaces. These spaces will be marked by white lines or markings painted or placed upon the street or curb for the purpose of designating the parking spaces. Each vehicle shall park within the lines or markings so established. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is also instructed to have numbers painted or placed upon the street or curb to identify each time-controlled, unmetered parking space. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-59. - Method of parking in time-controlled (unmetered) spaces. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way city street shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle parked in angled, unmetered parking spaces on a city street shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb or shoulder and parked as close as practicable to the curb or edge of the shoulder. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-60. - Maximum parking time; illegal parking. 
(a)  Any automobile or vehicle parked in any time-controlled, (unmetered) parking space for a longer period than two (2) hours is illegally parked. 
(b)  No automobile or other vehicle shall occupy an unmetered parking space in any time-controlled parking zone on the city streets continuously between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., from Monday through Saturday, in excess of the legal parking time posted pursuant to section 23-57. 
(c)  A vehicle parked in excess of the maximum two-hour time limit for any unmetered parking zone shall be parked overtime. A vehicle parked beyond the period of legal "free" unmetered parking shall be in violation of this section. 
(d)  No person employed by, or operating a business or profession in that part of the city designated as the "downtown district" by this subsection, and where on-street parking is controlled by this section, shall park a privately owned or company owned vehicle in any controlled parking space for the purpose of using such space as a substitute for a parking garage or other off-street parking facility, by leaving or storing said vehicle in such controlled on-street parking space while the owner or operator performs his or her duties at his or her regular place of employment. For purposes of this subsection the "downtown district" is defined as that district enclosed by the following city streets: West Gaines Street from North Church Street to North Jefferson Street, inclusively; East Gaines Street from North Jefferson Street to North Washington Street, inclusively; North Washington Street from East Gaines Street to East Jackson Street, inclusively; South Washington Street from East Jackson Street to East Madison Street, inclusively; East Madison Street from South Washington Street to South Jefferson Street, inclusively; West Madison Street from South Jefferson Street to South Church Street, inclusively; South Church Street from West Madison Street to East Jackson Street, inclusively; and North Church Street from East Jackson Street to West Gaines Street, inclusively. The provisions of this subsection shall be effective between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday of each week, except on those days designated as official holidays of the city. Upon conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to a violation of the provisions of this subsection, the violator shall pay a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) in addition to any other punishment or penalty imposed by the municipal court. 
(e)  Vehicles parked in the time-controlled, unmetered parking zones on Sundays and holidays are excepted from this section. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-61. - Illegal tampering with time-controlled monitoring devices. 
(a)  To maintain control and accessibility of time-controlled spaces to customers of downtown businesses, unmetered parking spaces shall be monitored by the police and parking enforcement personnel of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, erase, conceal or attempt to conceal, any marks placed on a vehicle or the tire thereof, by a police officer or parking enforcement personnel of the city for the purpose of measuring the time the parking space is occupied by that vehicle. 
(c)  Violation of the above subsection shall be punishable by a minimum twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
DIVISION 2. - PENALTIES; UNIFORM OVERTIME PARKING FINES; ILLEGAL USE OF NOTICE OR SUMMONS 

Sec. 23-62. - Fines. 
(a)  Overtime parking in violation of sections 23-59 and 23-61 of this Code shall be punishable by a minimum five dollar ($5.00) fine. 
(b)  The fine for any overtime parking ticket not paid within five (5) days from the date that it is issued shall be increased to a minimum fifteen dollar ($15.00) fine. 
(c)  Any person who accumulates three (3) or more overtime parking tickets which are not paid within five (5) days from the date of issue shall be punishable by a minimum twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine for each ticket. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Sec. 23-63. - Illegal use of notice or summons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after incurring a violation of any of the provisions of this article of this Code, to display, at a time-controlled parking space or location upon the streets of the city different from the space or location at which the violation was incurred, upon the windshield or other exterior portion of the vehicle involved in the violation, or upon the windshield or other exterior portion of any other vehicle, the official parking violation notice or summons of the municipal court placed upon the vehicle involved in the violation by an officer of the police department, whether the notice of summons be so displayed at such different space or location on the date of the issuance of the notice or summons or on a date subsequent thereto. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any official parking violation notice or summons, or any other official notice or summons of the municipal court, from the exterior or interior of any vehicle in the city not owned by that person or not in his or her legal possession, unless he or she is duly authorized by the owner or person in legal possession of the vehicle to remove it. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display, to affix or to place upon any portion of the exterior of any vehicle parked at any location in the city, any official parking violation notice or summons, or any other official notice or summons of the municipal court which has not been issued by an officer of the police department. Possession by any unauthorized person of any such official notice or summons, which has not been issued by an officer of the police department, shall be unlawful. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. 
(Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-19-89) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Engineering standards and specifications adopted, § 2-3; building and construction, Ch. 6; garbage and trash, Ch. 11; planning and zoning, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; underground utility installations, § 20-65 et seq.; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below: 
City manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Dublin and those to whom he delegates authority. 
Building inspector shall include the building superintendent, his designee or other persons assigned by the city manager to perform the required task. 
Private sewage disposal system is any system designed for the private disposal of sewage to be maintained by an individual, and includes, but is not limited to, septic tanks, cesspools, holding tanks for waste, chemical toilets, impervious vault toilets and portable toilets. 
State shall mean the State of Georgia and shall include, but not be limited to, the executive regulatory divisions thereof, such as the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and any and all laws and regulations promulgated. 
Utility shall be construed to mean and include water, sewer, gas and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1A, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-2. - Scope of provisions. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections, or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 24-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Sec. 24-4. - Rules, regulations. 
The mayor and city council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the council. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed an offense. 
Sec. 24-5. - Inspection outside city. 
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps outside the city limits until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. 
Sec. 24-6. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use. 
Sec. 24-7. - Termination of service authorized. 
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law; 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service; 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills; 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise; 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service; 
(6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor; 
(7)  Vacancy of premises. 
(Code 1964, § 29-17) 
Sec. 24-8. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-26) 
Sec. 24-9. - Utility service—Application required. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the city. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. 
Sec. 24-10. - Same—Not available to debtors. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except current taxes and special assessments. 
Sec. 24-11. - Same—Permit. 
Approval of the application for any utility service shall be deemed permission for such service. 
Sec. 24-12. - Same—Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the utility service. 
Sec. 24-13. - Not to use contrary to permit. 
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
Sec. 24-14. - Damage, trespass of equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
(Code 1964, §§ 29-17, 29-22—29-24) 
Sec. 24-15. - Temporary interruption of service. 
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit. 
(Code 1964, § 29-26) 
Sec. 24-16. - Restricting use. 
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
Sec. 24-17. - Sale of service by customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city except only by special arrangement with the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 24-18. - Connections to service. 
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the building inspector. 
Sec. 24-19. - Separate connections. 
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. 
Sec. 24-20. - Unlawful use of services; injury to and interference with property of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any reason to: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner thereof to injure or destroy any motor, pipe, conduit, wire, pole, lamp, manhole cover, fireplug or any accessories thereto belonging to the city or any other public or private utility (hereinafter called "owner") engaged in the manufacture of sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television, the furnishing of sanitary sewer service, or other public services without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof; 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner utilize any such service or consume any such product with intent to not pay the regular charge therefor to the owner, but with the intent to deprive the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor; 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of any such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge thereof; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such owner, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section or proof that a person knowingly received the benefits of such acts or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on the premises in possession of a person with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(c)  Every person convicted in the municipal court of the city of a violation of any provision of subsections (a) or (b) hereof shall be punished as provided by article V of the Charter of the City of Dublin and chapter 8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dublin. 
(Code 1964, § 29-17; Ord. No. 94-10, 11-3-94) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivision, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-21. - Unlawful use. 
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service. 
(Code 1964, § 29-25) 
Sec. 24-22. - Maintenance of system by consumer. 
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
Sec. 24-23. - Development of policies and procedures. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to develop policies and procedures for construction standards for the city utilities, for provision of service to customers, and for the implementation of this chapter. A copy of any policies developed shall be publicly available. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1F, 12-4-2014) 
Secs. 24-24—24-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 6-121 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-34. - Authority for tap, extension. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap to or extend any water main or use water with or without a meter, or to have a waterline for use, whether within or without the city, except by authority of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-13; Ord. No. 73-21, 11-20-73) 
Sec. 24-35. - Meters and appurtenances from street through meter box declared city property; refunds prohibited. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing between the city and the customer, the water meter and all appurtenances from the water main through the meter box shall belong to and remain the property of the city, and no refunds shall be made in connection with any installations hereafter made. This section shall not be construed to affect any meter installation prior to January 6, 1964. 
(Code 1964, § 29-20; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1B, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-36. - Water department to control meters. 
All water meters shall be under the exclusive control of the water department, and all repairs and inspections shall be made only by the water department. No one but an authorized employee of the water department shall be allowed to put in, take out or in any way handle the meters. 
(Code 1964, § 29-21) 
Sec. 24-37. - Service charge for meters and meter taps. 
(a)  All water meter taps shall be made and installed on the basis of a nonrefundable service charge, which shall be determined by the city manager. A schedule of these charges shall be made available upon request. 
(b)  In the event it is necessary to cut the street pavement in order to make a water tap, a charge in addition to those named in subsection (a) will be made for the purpose repairing the pavement, on a cost plus basis as established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 29-19, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 80-25, § 2, 9-18-80; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, 7-5-84; Ord. No. 84-14, § 1, 8-16-84; Ord. No. 91-17, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1C, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-38. - Water rates inside City of Dublin. 
The following rates shall be charged for water service within the corporate limits of the city: There shall be a monthly base charge of nine dollars and seventy cents ($9.70) per equipment replacement cost, (ERC), for all water users where the ERC factors by meter size. The minimum water service charge will be nine dollars and seventy cents ($9.70) times the ERC factor listed below according to meter size for the first two-thousand (2,000) gallons of water. For any usage in excess of two-thousand (2,000) gallons, there shall be a charge of three dollars and ninety cents ($3.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. 

 
Note— Rates effective beginning with July 10, 2018 billing. 
(Code 1964, § 29-14; Ord. No. 74-23, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 77-11, § 1, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-3-80; Ord. No. 82-10, § 1, 7-1-82; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 3-10-83; Ord. No. 84-8, § 1, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 85-23, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 12-4-86; Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 96-11, 6-20-96; Ord. No. 98-7, § 1, 6-18-98; Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 6-15-2000; Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 6-20-2002; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 5-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-2-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-07A, § 1, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-08A, § 1, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 06-09A, § 1, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 10-09A, § 1, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-11A, § 1, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-12A, § 1, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 10-13A, § 1, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 14-03A, § 1, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 14-15A, § 1, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-12A, § 1, 6-15-2017; Ord. No. 18-12A, effective 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 24-39. - Water rates for customers outside City of Dublin. 
The following rates shall be charged for water service without the corporate limits of the city: There shall be a monthly base charge of fifteen dollars and sixty cents ($15.60) per equipment replacement cost, (ERC), for all water users where the ERC factors are determined by meter size. The minimum water service charge will be fifteen dollars and sixty cents ($15.60) times the ERC factor listed in the table in section 24-38 according to meter size for the first two-thousand (2,000) gallons of water. For any usage in excess of two-thousand (2,000) gallons, there shall be a charge of seven dollars and eighty cents ($7.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. 
Additionally, all water rates charged will be increased each year by the amount of ten cents ($0.10) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water used inside the corporate limits of the city and twenty cents ($0.20) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water outside the corporate limits of the city effective with each July 10 billing hereafter. 
Note— Rates effective beginning with July 10, 2018 billing. 
(Code 1964, § 29-15; Ord. No. 74-23, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 77-11, § 2, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 80-17, § 2, 7-3-80; Ord. No. 82-10, § 2, 7-1-82; Ord. No. 83-3, § 2, 3-10-83; Ord. No. 84-8, § 2, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 85-23, § 2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-32, § 2, 12-4-86; Ord. No. 89-10, § 2, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 89-16, 10-5-89; Ord. No. 93-9, § 2, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 96-11, 6-20-96; Ord. No. 98-7, § 2, 6-18-98; Ord. No. 00-16, § 2, 6-15-2000; Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 6-20-2002; Ord. No. 04-09, § 2, 5-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, 6-2-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-07A, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-08A, § 2, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 06-09A, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 10-09A, § 2, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-11A, § 2, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-12A, § 2, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 10-13A, § 2, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 14-03A, § 2, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 14-15A, § 1, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-12A, § 2, 6-15-2017; Ord. No. 18-12A, effective 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 24-39.1. - Water rates for multiple users of one meter. 
All apartments, manufactured home parks, or residences with more than one (1) family using only one (1) water meter shall pay on the basis of one (1) water customer with the total amount of water used being the meter reading less a credit of two-thousand (2,000) gallons for all units in excess of one (1). The water bill will be figured on adjusted meter reading, plus the minimum bill, (set from time to time by the city and available from the city clerk), times the number of housing units in excess of one (1). 
(Ord. No. 77-11, § 3, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 80-17, § 3, 7-3-80; Ord. No. 82-10, § 3, 7-1-82; Ord. No. 83-3, § 3, 3-10-83; Ord. No. 06-15, § 12, 10-19-2006; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1D, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-40. - Payment of bills; penalty. 
All bills for water shall be due and payable at the customer service office upon receipt, and if said payment is not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date shown on the bill a ten (10) per cent delinquency penalty shall be added. If said bills are not paid within twenty-five (25) days after the date of the bill, water service shall be discontinued without further notice. Provided, however, that when the due date or cut-off date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, said bills shall become due, said penalty shall attach or said service shall be discontinued on the next succeeding business day after the due date or cut-off date. 
(Code 1964, § 29-16; Ord. No. 85-18, § 1, 11-21-85; Ord. No. 94-3, 4-24-94; Ord. No. 07-04, § 7, 5-3-2007) 
Cross reference— Payment of sewer bills, § 24-74. 
Sec. 24-41. - Landlords responsible for payment. 
To the extent allowed by law, landlords and their agents shall be responsible for the water rents, and shall give the city clerk written notice of the nonuse of water. 
(Code 1964, § 29-18; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1E, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-42. - Deposits required. 
(a)  A deposit of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be required for all new residential and small commercial water customers who have a good credit report from a credit reporting bureau or provide written evidence of a good payment record from their previous utility and for all residential and small commercial water customers transferring their accounts with the City of Dublin. 
(b)  A deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required from any current or former customer or transferee of the city utilities that has had utility services terminated for nonpayment of a monthly utility bill three (3) times within any twelve-month period or has paid three (3) late payments during a previous twelve-month period, and from new water customers who do not have a good credit report from a credit reporting bureau or provide written evidence of a good payment reference from their previous utility. 
(c)  An estimated three (3) months water usage charge or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), whichever is greater, shall be required for large commercial and small industrial water customers. 
(d)  Apartment buildings and other multiple users with only one (1) meter serving multiple units shall be required to pay the minimum deposit per unit of occupancy based on the payment history of the owners or managers of the complex. 
(e)  All deposits shall be paid in full in advance of connection to the utility service. Special consideration may be given on a conditional basis to new residential customers who do not have an established credit record. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, 2-18-93; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 24-43. - Cut-off and cut-on fees. 
A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged to water customers only for non-pay cut-off and a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for cut-on of services during normal working hours of the meter department. A fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) shall be charged for cut-on and/or cut-off after normal working hours of the meter department on weekdays and on weekends and city holidays. If a customer's bill for services is not paid when due and is disconnected by the city meter department for such failure to pay, then the customer must pay the cut-off fee and the cut-on fee, in addition to the amount of the past due bill, before being reconnected. A processing fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged to customers who pay delinquent utility bills after being processed for cut-off, but before city personnel has been dispatched to interrupt service. 
(Ord. No. 88-7, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 93-8, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-3-2007; Ord. No. 14-12, § 1A, 12-4-2014) 
Sec. 24-44. - Account establishment fee. 
All new utility customers and all customers transferring an account shall pay an account establishment fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which fee shall be billed on the first utility bill to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, 2-18-93; Ord. No. 07-04, § 5, 5-3-2007; Ord. No. 14-12, § 1B, 12-4-2014) 
Sec. 24-45. - Penalty for connecting to utility service prior to establishing account for service. 
A penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid by any utility user who is found to be connected to the utility services and who has not applied for such service. The penalty must be paid prior to reconnections of the service in addition to any other required deposits, usage charges and fees. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, 2-18-93; Ord. No. 07-04, § 6, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 24-46. - Public water system extensions and improvements. 
(a)  All water system extensions shall be designed and installed per the requirements of the state and the standard specifications of the city. All design shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer registered with the State of Georgia. Developments that only involve building water lines may have plans and specifications prepared by the project architect. 
(b)  All water system extension designs shall be submitted to the city engineer and the state, or their qualified representative, for approval. Once the design has been approved by all authorities, materials proposed for construction shall be submitted to the city. Only after approval of design and materials shall the developer by permitted to begin construction. Two (2) copies of drawings and an electronic file of these drawings shall be submitted to the engineering department 
(c)  Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connections between a drinking water supply and a sanitary or storm sewer, or appurtenance thereof. All facilities furnished with a public drinking water supply will have no physical connection with private wells or other private water supply systems, or any other source of contamination. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1F, 5-2-2013) 
DIVISION 2. - CONSERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-9, §§ 1-8, adopted March 7, 1991, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included as ch. 24, art. II, div. 2, §§ 24-47—24-52, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Building and construction, ch. 6. 

Sec. 24-47. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this division, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below:] 
Commercial: Any type of building other than residential. 
Construction: The erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and including the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential: Any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but not including a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 3-7-91) 
Sec. 24-48. - Residential construction. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; provided however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992. 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of two and five-tenths (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure. 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (l) gallon of water per flush. 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2) gallons of water per minute. 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and five-tenths (2.5) gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 2, 3-7-91) 
Sec. 24-49. - Commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections 24-48(1) through (5). 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 3, 3-7-91) 
Sec. 24-50. - Applicability. 
The requirements of sections 24-48 and 24-49 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of, or addition to, any existing building when such repair or renovation of, or addition to, such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 4, 3-7-91) 
Sec. 24-51. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 24-48, 24-49 and 24-50 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed; or 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 5, 3-7-91). 
Sec. 24-51.1. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  This limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; 
(13)  Hydroseeding; or 
(14)  Any other exceptions allowed under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the general penalty for violations of chapter 24, article II, division 2, a first offense violation of this section shall not carry a fine. Further violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 10-19, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 24-52. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 6, 3-7-91) 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing, 6-121 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-53. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
B.O.D: (Denoting biochemical oxygen demand.) The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade (sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit) expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer or lateral: The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by this city. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer or storm drain: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent: The superintendent or director of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designated by the mayor and city council. 
Suspended solids: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1964, § 29-38; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1G, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-54. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the municipality bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 24-55. - Deposit of objectionable wastes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within this city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
Sec. 24-56. - Discharges into natural outlets restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within this city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where permitted by the state. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1H, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-57. - Private facilities restricted. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1964, § 29-40) 
Sec. 24-58. - Damage to sewerage works. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewerage works. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall place, insert, drop or allow to enter the sanitary or storm system, pipes, manholes or lift stations any debris, construction materials, wrappings, bindings, rope, wire, plastic, paper, lumber, shingles, bricks and similar materials or any other object which damage the sanitary or storm sewer system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 72-33, § 29-39.1, 8-7-72) 
Sec. 24-59. - When connection to public sewers required. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of this city, and located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or after constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity or by means of a sewage pumping system (lift station), is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within sixty (60) days after date of official notice so to do. 
(Code 1964, § 29-41; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1I, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-59.1. - Sanitary sewer system extensions and improvements. 
(a)  All public sanitary sewer system extensions shall be designed and installed per the requirements of the state and the standard specifications of the city. All design shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer registered with the state. 
(b)  Sanitary sewer system extensions shall be submitted to the city engineer and state, or their qualified representative, for approval. Once the design has been approved by all authorities, materials proposed for construction shall be submitted to the city. Only after approval of design and materials shall the developer be permitted to begin construction. Two (2) copies of drawings and an electronic file of these drawings shall be submitted to the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1J, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-60. - Certain discharges into sanitary sewers prohibited. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
Sec. 24-61. - Discharges into storm sewers, natural outlets. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1K, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-62. - Restricted discharges enumerated. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described substances, waters or wastes to any public sewer. Where state or federal law or regulation sets a different limit, the more stringent shall govern: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-six (66) degrees Centigrade). 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar plastics, wood paunch, manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. The fixed upper limits for the constituents listed below, in parts per million, shall be: 
a.  Cadmium       0.02 
b.  Chromium       1.0 
c.  Copper       1.0 
d.  Cyanide       0.2 
e.  Nickel       1.0 
f.  Silver       1.0 
g.  Lead       0.1 
h.  Zinc       3.0 
i.  Phenol       0.05 
j.  Arsenic       0.05 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1L, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-63. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
Sec. 24-64. - Approval of certain discharges. 
The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; or 
(2)  Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 24-62 above; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two (2) per cent of the average daily flow of the city; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
Sec. 24-65. - Pretreatment facilities may be required. 
Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter; or 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 24-62 above; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water and wastes. 
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
Sec. 24-66. - Control manhole. 
(a)  When required, by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, maintenance, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so the manhole shall be safe and accessible at all times. 
(b)  A manhole shall be required at all connections to the sanitary sewer main where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  When recommended by state guidelines. 
(2)  When the service line is the same size as the sewer main. 
(3)  When two (2.0) feet or more distance between inverts exists. An outside drop shall be provided in such case. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1M, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-67. - Standard for measurements, tests. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 24-62, 24-64 and 24-65 shall be determined in accordance with "standard methods for the examination of water and sewage", at the control manhole provided in section 24-66, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sec. 24-68. - Special arrangements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
Sec. 24-69. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 24-58, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 24-58 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 24-59 hereof, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
Sec. 24-70. - Tapping fees. 
(a)  The fee for sewer taps shall be calculated on a cost plus basis as established by the city manager. A schedule of these charges shall be made available upon request. 
(b)  In the event it is necessary to cut the street pavement in order to make a sewer tap, a charge in addition to those named in subsection (a), on a cost plus basis as established by the city manager, will be made for the purpose of repairing the pavement. 
(Ord. No. 74-25, § 29-42, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 80-25, § 3, 9-18-80; Ord. No. 84-11, § II, 7-5-84; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1N, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-71. - City water service required. 
No tap shall be permitted with a public sewer unless the premises to be served thereby is served or to be served by the city water system through a water meter. 
(Code 1964, § 29-43) 
Sec. 24-72. - Sewer charges established. 
Effective with the July 10, 2018 billing and continuing each month thereafter is hereby assessed and levied upon each parcel of real property in the City of Dublin on which is located a sewer pipe connected onto the sewer system of the City of Dublin and the owner, residents or tenants of same, a monthly charge for the use and maintenance of the sewer system of the City of Dublin in an amount based on the following formula for all which have water meters: 
(a)  The minimum sewer service charge will be nine dollars and seventy cents ($9.70) for the first two-thousand (2,000) gallons of water plus three dollars and ninety-five cents ($3.95) per one-thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of the minimum two-thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(b)  All customers of the sewerage system of the City of Dublin that lie without corporate limits of the City of Dublin shall pay a sewer service fee of fifteen dollars and sixty cents ($15.60) for the first two-thousand (2,000) gallons of water used plus seven dollars and ninety cents ($7.90) per one-thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of the minimum two-thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(c)  All customers of the sewerage system of the City of Dublin that do not purchase water from the City of Dublin shall pay a flat rate as follows: 
(1)  All city residents shall pay a flat monthly charge of eighty dollars and eighty cents ($80.80). 
(2)  All residents outside the city limits shall pay a flat monthly charge of one hundred fifty seven dollars and eighty cents ($157.80). 
(d)  All apartments, mobile home parks, or residences with more than one-family housing, shall pay a sewer service charge as follows: 
A minimum charge of nine dollars and seventy cents ($9.70) for each unit for usage between zero (0) and two-thousand (2,000) gallons of water, plus three dollars and ninety-five cents ($3.95) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of two-thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(e)  All apartments, mobile home parks, or residences with more than one-family housing, without the corporate limits of the City of Dublin shall pay a sewer service charge as follows: 
A minimum charge of fifteen dollars and sixty cents ($15.60) for each unit for usage between zero (0) and two-thousand (2,000) gallons, plus seven dollars and ninety cents ($7.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of two-thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(f)  Additionally, all sewer rates charged will be increased each year by the amount of ten cents ($0.10) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water used inside the city and twenty cents ($0.20) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water used outside the city effective with the July 10 billing. 
(g)  All industrial wastewater containing constituents, which are in excess of the concentrations set for normal wastewater, as defined in sections 24-62, 24-63, and 24-64, are subject to surcharges. All surcharges will be based upon average unit costs for operation and maintenance of the water pollution control plant and calculated using the customer's average loadings from the previous month. The formula are as follows: 
(1)  The B.O.D. surcharge will be: 

 
(2)  The total Suspended Solids ("TSS") surcharge will be: 

 
(3)  $/lb. BOD + TSS x lbs./day × no. days in Month-Total Surcharge. 
The total sum of surcharges will then be added to the regular monthly sewer charge as one combined cost. 
Note— Rates effective beginning with July 10, 2018 billing. 
(Ord. No. 77-12, § 2, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 79-7, 5-7-79; Ord. No. 80-16, §§ 1, 2, 7-3-80; Ord. No. 83-3, § 4, 3-10-83; Ord. No. 84-23, 12-20-84; Ord. No. 85-22, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-32, § 2, 12-4-86; Ord. No. 90-8, 4-19-90; Ord. No. 93-7, 5-20-93; Ord. No. 94-4, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 96-11, 6-20-96; Ord. No. 98-14, 10-1-98; Ord. No. 00-16, § 2, 6-15-2000, Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 6-20-2002; Ord. No. 04-09, § 2, 5-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, 6-2-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-15, § 10, 10-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-07A, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 06-08A, § 2, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 06-09A, § 2, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 10-09A, § 2, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-11A, § 2, 6-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-12A, § 2, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 10-13A, § 2, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 14-03A, § 2, 6-19-2014;Ord. No. 14-15A, § 1, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-12A, § 2, 6-15-2017; Ord. No. 18-12A, effective 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 24-73. - Same—Waiver for certain residential users. 
(a)  The sewerage use fee for residential premises shall be waived upon proper notification to the city clerk that all of the following conditions are existing: 
(1)  No type of business or service is provided at the residence. 
(2)  Head of household is aged sixty (60) years or more. 
(3)  Income of head of household from all sources is under three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per year. 
(4)  Assets besides residence are under five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(5)  No other resident is making any income. 
(6)  No tenants live in the residence. 
(7)  It is not a public housing unit. 
(b)  It shall be incumbent upon the city clerk to establish the means to certify the conditions set forth above. The city clerk shall reexamine the qualifications of each household for waiver of the sewerage fee from time to time as necessary. 
(c)  Failure to disclose requested information shall be grounds for forfeiture of waiver. 
(Ord. No. 75-22, § 1, 7-7-75; Ord. No. 87-25, 9-3-87) 
Sec. 24-74. - Payment of bills; penalty; waiver. 
All bills for sewer shall be due and payable at the customer service office upon receipt, and if said bills are not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date shown on the bill, a ten (10) per cent delinquency penalty shall be added. If said bills are not paid within twenty-five (25) days after the date of the bill, sewer service shall be discontinued without further notice. Provided, however, that when the due date or cut-off date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, said bills shall become due, said penalty shall attach or said service shall be discontinued on the next succeeding business day after the due date or cut-off date. 
(Code 1964, § 29-51; Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 11-21-85; Ord. No. 07-04, § 8, 5-3-2007) 
Cross reference— Payment of water bills, § 24-40. 
Sec. 24-75. - Policy for making improvements in sewers, drains. 
(a)  The mayor and the city council shall, upon its own motion discuss and determine whether, when and what improvements, extensions, etc., shall be made to the sewage and drainage system in the city. Upon a determination by the mayor and city council that said improvements or extensions should be made within any particular area, then the mayor and city council shall cause to be published for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements of Laurens County are published, said advertisements setting forth fully and completely any number of streets or any part or parts thereof to be so improved, and setting forth the date of the regularly scheduled meeting at which any interested person may appear to voice objections, if any, and then after hearing such objection or discussion as the interested public may desire to present to the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall proceed to a final determination as to improvements to be made. 
(b)  If the owner of a majority of the lineal feet of the frontage of the land liable to assessment, or a numerical majority of the owners of such property as would be liable to assessment, for such improvement shall petition the mayor and city council for such improvement, then such request shall be placed upon the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting, said meeting occurring not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of said request. At said meeting, the mayor and city council shall consider such presentations for and against said request as interested parties shall care to present and upon consideration of these presentations, the mayor and city council shall determine whether or not said improvements shall be made. Such a request is advisory only to the mayor and city council and the mayor and city council shall have absolute discretion as to whether said improvements shall be done or not. 
(c)  The amount of assessment assessed against each piece of real estate shall be determined by a board of appraisers. 
(1)  The city clerk shall, upon completion of the improvements under consideration, provide the board of appraisers with an account of all expenses incurred by the city incident to said improvements. This includes any and all contractual obligations, equipment, services, material, engineering, etc. Then the mayor and city council shall appoint a board of appraisers consisting of three (3) members to appraise and apportion the costs and expenses of said improvements to the several tracts of land abutting on said improvement. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days from the date of the resolution, said board of appraisers shall file with the city clerk a written report of the appraisal and the assessment and costs upon the several lots or tracts of land abutting said improvement. 
(3)  When said report shall have been filed, the mayor and city council shall designate a regular meeting of their body for the hearing of any complaints or objections that may be made concerning said appraisals, apportionment and assessment by any person interested. Notice thereof shall be published by the city clerk once a week for two (2) weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. The time fixed for said hearing shall be not less than five (5) nor more than sixteen (16) days from the date of the last publication. The mayor and city council at said session shall have the power and it shall be its duty to review and correct said appraisal, apportionment and assessment and to hear objections to the same whether as made by said board, or as corrected by the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall, by ordinance, fix the assessments in accordance with said appraisal and apportionment as so confirmed against the several tracts of land liable therefor. 
(4)  Assessments in conformity to said appraisal and apportionment as confirmed by the mayor and city council shall be payable to the city in cash within thirty (30) days from the date of passage of said ordinance, without interest. 
(5)  In the event the owner of the land so assessed shall, within thirty (30) days of the passage of the ordinance making the assessment final, file with the city clerk his written request asking that the assessment be payable in installments, the same shall thereupon be and become payable in equal annual installments over a period of three (3) years and the rate of interest at nine (9) per cent on the unpaid balance, along with the proper portion of the principal, shall be payable each year at the office of the city clerk on the anniversary date of the passage of the ordinance above referred to, plus thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1964, § 29-50) 
Secs. 24-76—24-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 24-83. - When permissible. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 24-59, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 29-44) 
Sec. 24-84. - Permit required. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee in an amount determined by the city manager shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1964, §§ 29-39, 29-44; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1O, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-85. - Inspection; approval. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
Sec. 24-86. - System restricted. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Laurens County Health Department and all laws and regulations of the state. No private sewage disposal system shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1P, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-87. - When to be abandoned. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 24-59, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any private sewage disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1964, § 29-45; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1Q, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-88. - Maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-45) 
Sec. 24-89. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by state or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1R, 5-2-2013) 
Secs. 24-90—24-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 24-97. - Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Code 1964, § 29-39) 
Sec. 24-98. - Classification of permits. 
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits, as follows: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
Sec. 24-99. - Application for permit. 
The owner or his agent shall make application for a permit required by the provisions of this division on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. 
Sec. 24-100. - Permit fees. 
All required permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. In cases where no fee is specified by ordinance or schedule, the city manager shall set a fee. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1S, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-101. - Liability for costs, expenses. 
All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1T, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-102. - Separate connections, exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. However, where one (1) building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. A plan showing the proposed connection must be submitted to the city and approved before connection. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1U, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-103. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
Sec. 24-104. - Specifications generally. 
All building services shall follow the materials and design of the current International Building Code and the International Plumbing Code. The chief building inspector, or authorized city representative, shall approve all materials, design and installation of building sewer services. All building services up to and including six (6) inch sewers shall be schedule 40 pvc. Other materials shall require approval of the chief building inspector. A cleanout or cleanouts shall be placed in every building sewer at such locations as may be determined by the building inspector, engineer or designated city representative. Cleanouts for four- and six-inch sewers shall not be spaced more than eighty (80) feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1V, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-105. - Size, slope. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-quarter inch per foot unless otherwise specified in the current International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1W, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-106. - Location generally. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within five (5) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with the proper fittings or manholes. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1X, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-107. - Lift facilities for sewage. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted or pumped by approved artificial means and discharged to the public sanitary sewer, using a system approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1Y, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-108. - Excavations. 
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12 except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
Sec. 24-109. - Joints and connections generally. 
(a)  All joints and connections shall be made soil-tight and watertight. 
(b)  All joints, jointing materials and methods shall be approved by the chief building inspector or the authorized representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1Z, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-110. - Point, manner of connection. 
The developer shall obtain approval from the superintendent, or the city's authorized representative, prior to making any building service connection to the sanitary sewer main. All materials required for the connection shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval prior to construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1AA, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-111. - Notice when ready for inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
Sec. 24-112. - Protection of public. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. All applicable state and federal guidelines (including but not limited to those of the Occupation Safety and Health Administration and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control) shall be followed by all developers and contractors working within the city right-of-way. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1BB, 5-2-2013) 
Sec. 24-113. - Sewage backflow prevention. 
An approved type backflow prevention device shall be required: 
(1)  In all new construction and service sewer replacements. 
(2)  When any replacement or repair is being made to the sanitary sewer lateral. 
(3)  When property has been damaged by backflow from the city sanitary sewer main or the private lateral. 
(4)  On all structures where a pump is used to lift sewage to the sanitary sewer system main line. The backflow relief device shall be located to protect the structure from damage in the event that the pump is pumping against a closed backflow device. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1CC, 5-2-2013) 
Secs. 24-114—24-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Gas code, § 6-141 et seq. 

Sec. 24-124. - Deposits required. 
(a)  A deposit of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be required for all new residential and small commercial firm gas customers with a good credit rating from a past utility and for all residential and small commercial firm gas customers transferring their accounts. 
(b)  A gas deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be required from any current or former customer or transferee of the City of Dublin utilities that has had utility services terminated for nonpayment three (3) times within any twelve-month period or has paid three (3) late payments during any previous twelve-month period, and from new customers who do not have a good credit report from a credit reporting bureau or provide written evidence of a good payment reference from their previous utility. 
(c)  An estimated three (3) months' demand charge or two hundred ninety-seven dollars ($297.00), whichever is greater, shall be required for large commercial and small industrial gas customers. An estimated two (2) months' bill shall be required for industrial customers using gas under the interruptible rate. 
(Code 1964, § 29-61(b); Ord. of 11-17-75; Ord. No. 80-25, § 4, 9-18-80; Ord. No. 91-11, 6-6-91; Ord. No. 07-04, § 2, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 24-125. - Residential, commercial and interruptible rates—Generally. 
The following base rates shall be charged for residential, commercial and interruptible gas service to all customers served from Dublin gas distribution system. There shall be a monthly base charge of nine dollars and fifty cents ($9.50) per equipment replacement cost, (ERC), for all natural gas users where the ERC factors by the meter size. The minimum base rate charge will be nine dollars and fifty cents ($9.50) times the ERC factor listed below according to meter size. 

 
The following rates shall be charged for residential and commercial gas service within and without the city: 
(1)  Minimum charge for all consumption, per 100 cubic feet ..... $9.50 
(2)  At any time, the price of gas, inside FERC, SPOT MARKET or the City of Dublin's WACOG (weighted average cost of gas), increase to within a net of forty cents ($0.40) per CCF of the above rate as in subsection 24-125(3), a volumetric rate is used to calculate all consumption. That rate is based on SPOT MARKET or the City of Dublin's WACOG (weighted average cost of gas), plus forty cents ($0.40) per CCF distribution charge, plus tax. 
(3)  The gas rates for residential premises shall be discounted twenty (20) per cent per household upon proper notification to the city clerk that all of the following conditions are existing: 
a.  No type of business or service is provided at the residence. 
b.  Head of household is age sixty-two (62) years or more. 
c.  Only one (1) person in household and income from all sources is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year, or only two (2) persons in household and income from all sources is more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), but less than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year. 
d.  Assets besides residence are under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
e.  No tenants live in residence. 
f.  Residence is not a public housing or subsidized housing unit. 
(4)  The Georgia State sales tax, applicable local option sales tax and any applicable franchise fee, is to be added to all bills except those exempt by law. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, 6-7-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-03, adopted June 7, 2018, repealed the former § 24-125, and enacted a new § 24-125 as set out herein. The former § 24-125 pertained to domestic, small commercial rates—generally, and derived from Ord. No. 76-10, § 29-61(a), 5-17-76; Ord. No. 77-13, § 1, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 78-18, § 1, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 78-19, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 79-18, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 79-20, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 80-1, § 1, 1-28-80; Ord. No. 80-2, 1-28-80; Ord. No. 80-11, § 1, 6-5-80; Ord. No. 80-33, § 1, 12-18-80; Ord. No. 81-5, § 1, 2-19-81; Ord. No. 81-15, § 1, 7-2-81; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 2-4-82; Ord. No. 82-18, § 1, 10-25-82; Ord. No. 82-27, § 1, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 83-8, § 1, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, 10-20-83; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 84-20, § 1, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 85-9, § 1, 5-16-85; Ord. No. 86-10, § 1, 4-10-86; Ord. No. 86-21, § 1, 10-1-86; Ord. No. 93-14, 12-9-93; Ord. No. 00-15, 6-15-2000; Ord. No. 00-21, 11-2-2000; Ord. No. 03-26, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 13-05, §§ 1A—1C, 7-25-2013. 
Sec. 24-125.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-05, § 1E, adopted July 25, 2013, repealed § 24-125.1, entitled "Domestic, small commercial rates—Wilkinson and Baldwin Counties", which derived from: Ord. No. 77-14, adopted Apr. 18, 1977; Ord. Nos. 79-19 and 79-21, adopted Aug. 6, 1979; Ord. No. 80-12, adopted June 5, 1980; Ord. No. 80-32, adopted Dec. 18, 1980; Ord. No. 81-6, adopted Feb. 19, 1981; Ord. No. 81-16, adopted July 2, 1981; Ord. No. 82-4, adopted Feb. 4, 1982; Ord. No. 82-18, adopted Oct. 25, 1982; Ord. No. 82-27, adopted Jan. 20, 1983; Ord. No. 83-8, adopted July 21, 1983; Ord. No. 83-18, adopted Oct. 20, 1983; Ord. No. 84-17, adopted Oct. 18, 1984; Ord. No. 84-20, adopted Dec. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 85-9, adopted May 16, 1985; Ord. No. 86-10, adopted Apr. 10, 1986; Ord. No. 86-21, adopted Oct. 1, 1986; Ord. No. 93-14, adopted Dec. 9, 1993; Ord. No. 00-15, adopted June 15, 2000; Ord. No. 03-26, adopted Aug. 21, 2003; and Ord. No. 05-14, adopted Sept. 8, 2005. 
Sec. 24-126. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-14, enacted Dec. 9, 1993, deleted former § 24-126 relative to gas service rates for large commercial and industrial firms. For provisions re commercial gas rates generally, the user's attention is directed to § 24-125. 
It should also be noted that a comprehensive history of the legislation affecting former § 24-126 can be found in the Code Comparative Table towards the end of this volume. 
Sec. 24-127. - Industrial interruptible. 
(a)  Availability. Available anywhere on the existing city system both inside and outside the corporate limits. Interruptible service is contingent upon the availability of interruptible transportation on Southern Natural Gas Company and available capacity on the city's system. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicable to any nonresidential customer having facilities permitting the use of natural gas on an interruptible basis and whose average daily consumption is one hundred (100) Mcf per day or greater and provided the customer has entered into an interruptible agreement with the city. 
(c)  Rate. The rate will be comprised of the following components. 
Monthly base service charge: The minimum base rate charge will be nine dollars and fifty cents ($9.50) times the ERC factor listed above according to meter size. 
(1)  Commodity charges. Spot market index price as posted in "Inside FERC's Gas Market Report" for deliveries into Southern Natural or the City of Dublin's WACOG (weighted average cost of gas) for the month. 
(2)  Fuel recovery. Recovery of Southern Natural's pipeline fuel charge. 
(3)  Interstate pipeline transportation. Southern Natural zone 3 interruptible transportation plus applicable pipeline surcharges and balancing charges. 
(4)  City distribution fee. 

 
(5)  Sales tax, if applicable. 
(d)  Heating value adjustment. The above rate is based on natural gas having an average standard value of one thousand (1,000) BTU per cubic foot of dry gas. In the event that the average heating value of gas supplied during any month varies above or below one thousand (1,000) BTU per cubic foot, the rate of gas above set forth shall be adjusted by multiplying such charge by the fraction, the numerator of which shall be the heating value of the gas supplied during the month, the denominator shall be one thousand (1,000). For the purpose of determining such average BTU content, the city will rely upon the accuracy of reports furnished by Southern Natural Gas Company. The customer shall discontinue its taking of gas when notified by the city, within two (2) hours after such notice is given, and when notified to discontinue for a specified day, the day will begin at 10:00 a.m. and continue for twenty-four (24) hours. 
(e)  Authorized overrun (AO) charges. All interruptible customers shall be billed for the additional charges created by AO usage according to their per centage of interruptible usage. 
(Ord. No. 76-10, § 29-61(a), 5-17-76; Ord. No. 77-13, § 1, 4-18-77; Ord. No. 78-18, § 3, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 79-18, § 3, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 79-20, § 3, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 80-1, § 3, 1-28-80; Ord. No. 80-11, § 3, 6-5-80; Ord. No. 80-33, § 3, 12-18-80; Ord. No. 81-5, § 3, 2-19-81; Ord. No. 81-15, § 3, 7-2-81; Ord. No. 82-3, § 3, 2-4-82; Ord. No. 82-18, §§ 3, 4, 10-25-82; Ord. No. 82-27, §§ 3, 4, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 83-8, §§ 2, 3, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 83-18, §§ 3, 4, 10-20-83; Ord. No. 84-17, § 3, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 84-20, § 3, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 85-9, §§ 3, 4, 5-16-85; Ord. No. 86-10, §§ 3, 4, 4-10-86; Ord. No. 86-21, §§ 3, 4, 10-1-86; Ord. No. 00-15, 6-15-2000; Ord. No. 02-14, 10-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-26, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 14-12, §§ 1C, 1D, 12-4-2014; Ord. No. 18-03, 6-7-2018) 
Secs. 24-128—24-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-18, adopted July 3, 1978, specifically amended the Code by repealing §§ 24-128—24-131, which pertained to industrial and summertime rates. Said sections had been derived from Code 1964, § 29-62; Ord. No. 76-10, § 29-61(a), (e), 5-17-76; and Ord. No. 77-13, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 1977. 
Sec. 24-133. - Sales tax. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all customers of gas furnished by the city shall pay the sales tax required by the state in addition to the required gas charges. 
(Code 1964, § 29-61; Ord. No. 76-10, 5-17-76) 
Sec. 24-134. - Cut-off and cut-on fees. 
(a)  A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for non-pay cut-off and a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for cut-on of gas services after payment is received and during normal working hours of the meter department. 
(b)  A fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged for seasonal cut-off and a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged for seasonal cut-on during normal working hours of the meter department. 
(c)  A fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) shall be charged for cut-on and/or cut-off after normal working hours of the meter department on weekdays and on weekends and city holidays. 
(d)  When a customer requests that the gas account be closed a reactivation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged when a gas customer request a turn on, at the same address, under same name after ninety (90) days. If the customer's gas service is turned off for more than twelve (12) months, a pressure test is required by a certified gas contractor per Dublin's gas policy and standards. 
(e)  If a customer's bill for services is not paid when due and is disconnected by the city meter department for such failure to pay, then the customer must pay the cut-off fee and the cut-on fee, in addition to the amount of the past-due bill, before being reconnected. 
(f)  A forty dollar ($40.00) processing fee shall be charged to customers who pay delinquent utility bills after being processed for cut-off, but before city personnel has been dispatched to interrupt service. 
(Code 1964, § 29-61(c); Ord. No. 75-16, 4-7-75; Ord. No. 80-25, § 5, 9-18-80; Ord. No. 88-7, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 93-8, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 07-04, § 4, 5-3-2007; Ord. No. 14-12, § 1.E., 12-4-2014) 
Sec. 24-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-7, adopted Feb. 18, 1988, repealed § 24-135, which section pertained to penalty for overdue charges and derived from Code 1964, § 29-61(d). 
Sec. 24-136. - Payment of bills; penalty. 
All bills for gas shall be due and payable at the customer service office upon receipt, and if said bills are not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date shown on the bill, a ten (10) per cent delinquency penalty shall be added. If said bills are not paid within twenty-five (25) days after the date of the bill, gas service shall be discontinued without further notice. Provided, however, that when the due date or cut-off date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, said bills shall become due, said penalty shall attach or said service shall be discontinued on the next succeeding business day after the due date or cut-off date. 
(Code 1964, § 29-63; Ord. No. 82-27, § 5, 1-20-83; Ord. No. 83-8, § 4, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 85-20, § 1, 11-21-85; Ord. No. 94-3, 4-24-94; Ord. No. 07-04, § 9, 5-3-2007) 
Sec. 24-137. - Turning on gas after discontinuance. 
If for any reason the gas of any consumer in the city is cut off and subsequently it shall be turned on without the permission of the gas department, the person turning on the gas shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In any case where gas is turned on after having been cut off without permission of the gas department, it shall be prima facie evidence of guilt. 
(Code 1964, § 29-64) 
Secs. 24-138, 24-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 24-140. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-141. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-142. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Dublin. 
Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-143. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services as of the date of passage of this article include water, sewer, gas and internet access. 
(c)  The City of Dublin has not experienced identity theft related to covered accounts. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for, or otherwise involved in, opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-144. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with unique personal identifying information of the customer, such as, a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-145. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by city clerk, or by his designee, on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-146. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-147. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account, shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. 
The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-148. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-149. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-150. - Program administration. 
(a)  The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(b)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; 
(4)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(c)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-151. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 24-152. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "notice of address discrepancy" means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(c)  In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one (1) or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(d)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(e)  The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
TITLE OF ORDINANCE 
This ordinance shall be known, referred to and recited as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dublin, Georgia, and shall be effective throughout the city. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A sets out the zoning ordinance of the city as the same was adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen on the twenty-fifth day of August, 1969, and as the same has been amended since such date. Due to the statutory requirements relative to the enactment and amendment of such an ordinance, incorporation thereof into a Code of Ordinances is not deemed advisable; hence its inclusion as an appendix for the benefit and convenience of the user of this Code. Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1980, added a new Art. 8 and renumbered former Arts. 8—13 as Arts. 9—14. 
Cross reference— Engineering standards and specifications adopted, § 2-3; building, ch. 6; parks and recreation, ch. 15; planning and zoning, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 24; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning generally, Ga. Code Ann., ch. 69-8; planning commissions, ch. 69-12. 

ARTICLE 1. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
In pursuance of the authority conferred by the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements in accordance with a comprehensive plan; and for other purposes, the City Council of the City of Dublin does hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections: 
ARTICLE 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Section 2.1. - District names. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Dublin is hereby divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 80-34, § 1, 12-18-80) 
Section 2.2. - Zoning map. 
Said districts are bounded as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Dublin" which, with all notations, references and explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. A copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be certified by the City Clerk; shall bear the date of adoption of this ordinance; and shall be kept on display in the office of the Building Inspector. 
2.2.1. If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be caused to be made on the Official Zoning Map by the Building Inspector promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. 
2.2.2. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 8.4 of this ordinance. 
2.2.3. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Dublin shall be automatically classified in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District until otherwise classified by ordinance in the manner prescribed herein, or unless a different classification is called for in the annexation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 79-12, 6-4-79) 
2.2.4. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by official action of the Mayor and Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of same. 
Section 2.3. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are: 
(a)  Platted lot lines 
(b)  Street right-of-way lines 
(c)  Street, stream and railroad right-of-way centerline 
(d)  Corporate limits of the city 
2.3.1. Where a district boundary line appearing on the Official Zoning Map divides a lot in single ownership at the time or enactment of this zoning ordinance, the district requirement for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
2.3.2. Where the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered above, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
ARTICLE 3. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Section 3.1. - Use. 
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Section 3.2. - Height and density. 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(a)  To exceed the height limits; 
(b)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(c)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
(d)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, court yards or other open spaces, than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 3.3. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot or yard may be reduced in size or area so that the lot width or depth; front, side, rear or court yard; lot area per family; or any other requirement of this ordinance is not maintained. 
Section 3.4. - Yards and other open space. 
No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required above or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
Section 3.5. - Principal building and frontage. 
Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected or placed on a lot. No principal building shall be erected or placed on a lot which does not abut a public right-of-way for at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
Section 3.6. - Visual restriction. 
In all use districts, no wall, sign or other obstruction to vision shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way lines of streets. Only signs and appurtenances pertaining to traffic regulation shall be permitted within a street right-of-way. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 4.1. - Nonconforming uses permitted. 
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment to this ordinance, lawful use of land or building exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Once changed to a conforming use, no land or building shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(b)  No building that is damaged in any way to the extent of more than forty (40) per cent of its replacement cost shall be repaired, except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
(c)  No nonconforming building may be reconstructed or structurally altered to the extent of forty (40) per cent of its replacement cost unless said building is changed to a conforming use. 
(d)  Whenever a nonconforming building or land use has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year, no nonconforming use shall thereafter be established. 
Section 4.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 1981, repealed former § 4.2 of app. A which pertained to discontinuance of nonconforming uses and was derived unamended from the original zoning ordinance as adopted Aug. 25, 1969. 
Section 4.3. - Off-street parking and loading. 
Off-street parking, storage, standing and loading space shall be provided as hereafter established. 
4.3.1. The size of each required parking space shall be three hundred (300) square feet, including access aisles thereto, but excluding driveways. Turning space except in R-1, 2, 3, districts shall be provided so that no vehicle will be required to back onto a street. Such space shall be provided, with access to a street or public alley, to meet the following requirements: 

 
4.3.2. When the required off-street parking space cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building it serves, such space may be provided on another property. Such property shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the premises of which it is appurtenant as measured along the nearest and shortest pedestrian route. 
4.3.3. No part of an off-street parking area required for complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use. However, nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street parking space for two (2) or more buildings or uses if the total of such spaces, when used together, shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for various individual uses or buildings computed separately. 
4.3.4. Every structure hereafter constructed and used for commercial, wholesale, terminal or manufacturing purposes shall provide space for loading and unloading vehicles. The size of each loading space shall be five hundred (500) square feet. Such space cannot be on a public right-of-way or public alley. However, it shall have access to a street or public alley and meet the following requirements: 
Commercial businesses and services: One (1) space for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
Wholesale and manufacturing: One (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space or part thereof. 
Bus and truck terminals: One (1) space for the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored, stopped, loaded or unloaded at the terminal at one time. 
4.3.5. Vegetation/landscaping. 
(a)  Commercial-industrial development. In the development and or redevelopment of commercial and or industrially zoned property, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan outlined in the site and development plans. In the establishment of parking areas required to serve commercial and industrial property, there shall be presented by the developer of such property a plot plan on which is shown those trees twelve (12) inches and above in caliber diameter to be removed and those which shall remain after installation of the parking facilities. In order to encourage developers to preserve existing trees, trees that are twelve (12) inches and above in caliper diameter that the developer proposes to remain on the property will diminish the planting requirements. 
(b)  Minimum trees and planted shrubbery required in parking facilities. There shall be required within the overall landscape plan of any commercial or industrial parking lot development a minimum of one (1) approved tree (section 14.39.a-1, definitions) for every ten (10) parking spaces contained in the developed parking lot, with a minimum of one (1) approved tree for each business establishment served by the parking lot, and a minimum of ten (10) per cent of lot to be plantings, shrubbery, which may include planted detention area and planted buffer zones. Approved tree twelve (12) inches and above in caliper diameter that remain on the property will fulfill the planting requirements as follows. Every existing approved tree twelve (12) inches and above in caliper diameter will fulfill the planting requirements of two (2) trees, and every existing tree twenty-four (24) inches and above will fulfill the planting requirement of three (3) trees. 
(c)  Substitution of trees. If, due to development conditions beyond control of the developer of any commercial or industrial property within the city, there does not exist the minimum number of approved trees required in subsection (b) of this section, the developer owner of the property shall ensure the installation and continued maintenance of the required number of approved trees as directed by the planning and zoning department of the city or in the alternative the developer owner shall install and maintain shrubbery and or planting as directed by the planning and zoning department of the city up to the value of the approved trees required to be installed under the terms and conditions of this article. All approved trees required to be installed under the conditions of this section shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height at time of installation, one such caliper, and comply with the American Standard for Nursery Stock, on file in the planning and zoning building department office. 
(d)  Paving around trees. No pavement consisting of concrete, asphalt or other impervious material shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the outside diameter of any tree located in any tree located in any parking lot area within the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. 03-15, 6-5-2003) 
Section 4.4. - Buffer strips. 
When any commercial, professional, industrial or multifamily residential district abuts a single-family residential district, a planted buffer strip shall be provided at the property line, or lines, where the two (2) districts abut. The buffer shall consist of a hedge or similar planted material maintained to a depth of five (5) feet and height of eight (8) feet. Such buffer shall extend not closer than twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way of an intersecting street. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 9-17-87) 
Section 4.5. - Mobile homes and manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes are permitted only within a manufactured home park within the R-3 and R-4 districts. Mobile homes, as defined in this zoning ordinance, are not permitted in any zoning district. No mobile home or recreational vehicle may be used as a residence. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 1, 10-19-2006) 
ARTICLE 5. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICTS 

Section 5.1. - Single-family residential district, R-1. 
The R-1 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential area traffic on minor streets and to protect the orderly future development of the land in accordance with comprehensive development plans for the city. 
5.1.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings, excluding trailers and mobile homes of all types. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses incidental to each one-family dwelling, including private garages and noncommercial greenhouses, when placed upon the same lot or parcel of ground, provided that they are in the rear yard at least five (5) feet from the lot line. 
(c)  Customary, incidental home occupations, including an office maintained by a person in the residence of said person. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling may be used for such home occupations. No more than one person, in addition to family members, may be employed. No materials or supplies may be stored in the open or visible from adjacent properties. One (1) outside nonilluminated sign attached flat to the structure, two (2) square feet or less in area is permitted. 
(d)  Public, private and parochial elementary and secondary schools offering general education courses. However, no building for such use shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line except where such property line is a street line, in which case the yard requirements of the district shall apply. 
(e)  Public and quasi-public playgrounds, noncommercial recreation areas and golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs and their associated buildings, except amusement parks. No building for such uses shall be permitted less than one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(f)  Public buildings and public land uses, provided that no building for such use shall be within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
(g)  Churches and associated buildings, provided that no building shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line. A planted buffer strip at least five (5) feet wide, along the side and rear lot lines and having a height of not less than eight (8) feet, shall be provided. 
(h)  Signs, nonilluminated, limited to the following: 
(1)  Professional nameplates and signs which identify permitted home occupations not more than two (2) square feet in area. 
(2)  Nonresidential use signs for churches, clubs, recreation areas, etc., not more than ten (10) square feet in area. 
(3)  A sign advertising the property as being for sale or lease, provided that it does not advertise property located elsewhere. 
(i)  Public utility stations such as electrical substations, if such stations are essential to the immediate area and provided such stations are enclosed by a woven wire fence not less than six (6) feet high, are landscaped to buffer noise and no vehicles nor equipment are stored on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 78-28, § 1, 11-20-78) 
Section 5.2. - Single-family residential district, R-2. 
The R-2 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential area traffic on minor streets, to meet the needs and demands of higher density single-family residences and to protect the orderly future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans for the city. 
5.2.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R-1 zone. 
(b)  Privately operated nursery, preschool or kindergarten, provided that a minimum open play area of one hundred (100) square feet is provided for each child and that each outdoor area is enclosed on all sides to a height of at least three (3) feet six (6) inches by a fence. A planted buffer strip at least five (5) [feet] wide shall enclose such play area on all sides. 
(c)  Community unit plan and group housing. 
Section 5.3. - Multifamily residential district, R-3. 
The R-3 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of two-family and medium density residential areas and to protect the future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans for the city. 
5.3.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R-2 zone. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Manufactured home parks. (See Section 7.8) 
(d)  Rooming and boardinghouses. 
(e)  Nursing, rest and convalescent homes. 
(f)  Fraternal organizations, clubs and lodges. 
(g)  Signs indicating the name of the use of the property, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, provided that if illuminated, such sign shall be of an enclosed lamp design, nonflashing and contain no color illumination. 
(h)  Accessory use or building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, providing: 
(1)  Accessory buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard not less than ten (10) feet from the main building nor less than five (5) feet from any side or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 78-28, § 2, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 06-15, §§ 3, 4, 10-19-2006) 
Section 5.4. - Multifamily residential district, R-4. 
The R-4 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of higher density residential areas and to protect the future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans for the city. 
5.4.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R-3 zone. 
(b)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(c)  Accessory use or building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including as follows: 
(1)  Two-family dwellings: 
Accessory buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard not less than ten (10) feet from the main building nor less than five (5) feet from any side or rear yard. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings and other uses: 
All accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard and not nearer to any lot line than the distance prescribed for side and rear yards. 
(3)  Swimming pools may be located within the buildable area of any tract or parcel of land used for multiple family dwelling purposes, provided that when located on property adjacent to single family dwelling districts, such pools, including their enclosed areas, shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet thereof, except if separated by a solid wall of at least eight (8) feet in height or a multifamily dwelling. 
Section 5.45. - High density residential development, R-5. 
The purpose of this district is to provide a suitable area for development of planned residential communities at a higher density that allow a full range of residential uses and housing types, open space and green area. This area may include single-family, detached and/or attached patio homes and townhouses. 
5.45.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Single-family, detached and/or attached patio homes; 
(b)  Single-family, detached and/or attached townhouses. 
(Ord. No. 87-27, 9-17-87) 
Cross reference— Development standards for R-5 districts, App. A, § 8.6. 
Section 5.5. - Bellevue Avenue district, H-1. 
The H-1 zone is established to preserve the character of the area for single-family residential/professional office development (except where the economic feasibility of maintaining the historically significant structures of the zone might preclude such land uses). The district is intended to ensure that any new development will be compatible with the existing development; and that any new construction should observe the general setback and height restrictions of the original development to preserve the physical character of the zone. 
5.5.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings, excluding trailers and mobile homes of all types. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses incidental to each one-family dwelling, including private garages and noncommercial greenhouses, when placed upon the same lot or parcel of ground, provided that they are in the rear yard at least five (5) feet from the lot line. 
(c)  Customary, incidental home occupations, including an office maintained by a person in the residence of said person. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling may be employed. No materials or supplies may be stored in the open or visible from adjacent properties. 
(d)  Public buildings and public land uses. 
(e)  Professional (including medical for humans, dental, legal, real estate and architectural) offices. 
(f)  Governmental offices. 
(g)  Quasi-public buildings and utility offices, substations and exchanges. 
5.5.2. Conditional uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted by the planning commission only upon showing that such use is not incompatible with or detrimental to the residen tial character of the area and subject to limitations and requirements of this zoning ordinance and its amendments. 
(a)  Private and public meeting halls. 
(b)  Museums and art galleries. 
(c)  Insurance offices and interior decorator offices, etc., where the nature of the business is primarily one of personal services. 
(d)  Restaurants, including those serving alcohol on-premises. 
(e)  Flower, book and gift shops. 
(f)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(g)  Personal care homes. 
Each conditional use permit shall be subject to the prior granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the Dublin Historic Review Commission. 
5.5.3 Signs. Signs shall be subject to the granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the Dublin Historic Review Commission, and limited to the following: 
(a)  Nameplates and signs which identify permitted home occupations not more than two (2) square feet in area; nonilluminated. 
(b)  Nonresidential use signs not more than thirty (30) square feet in area. 
(c)  A sign advertising the property as being for sale or lease, provided that it does not advertise property located elsewhere; and not more than twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 80-34, § 2, 12-18-80; Ord. No. 08-11, 6-5-2008) 
Section 5.6. - Professional district, P. 
The P zone is established to encourage and provide a suitable atmosphere for professional offices and related activities. The district is intended to group professional and similar uses with a minimum of interference from traffic and conflicting uses. The district is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.6.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Professional (including medical, dental, legal, financial, architectural, real estate or insurance) offices. 
(b)  Governmental offices. 
(c)  Public and quasi-public buildings and utility offices, substations and exchange. 
(d)  Clinics for humans. 
(e)  Business and vocational schools and colleges. 
(f)  Private and public club and meeting halls. 
(g)  Churches and associated buildings. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Parking lots and structures. 
(j)  Flower, book and gift shops. 
(k)  Pharmacies; provided that merchandise is limited to drugs and medical supplies and devices. 
(l)  Accessory use of building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses; provided that accessory buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard not less than ten (10) feet from any side or rear yard. 
(m)  Any advertising sign; provided that it does not advertise a business or service not located on the premises, that if such sign is attached to a building, it does not exceed the width of said building and does not protrude into a public or railroad right-of-way. In no case shall such sign exceed thirty (30) square feet in area. 
(n)  A nursery, preschool or kindergarten, provided that a minimum open play area of one hundred (100) square feet is provided for each child and that such outdoor area is enclosed on all sides to a height of at least three (3) feet, six (6) inches by a fence. A planted buffer strip at least five (5) feet wide shall enclose such play area on all sides. 
5.6.2. Conditional uses permitted. 
(a)  Nonmechanical car wash. 
(Ord. No. 78-29, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-16, § 2, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 10-16-86; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87; Ord. No. 90-4, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 91-2, 1-17-91; Ord. No. 95-10, 7-6-95) 
Section 5.7. - Public district, P-1. 
The P-1 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for the operation of hospitals, institutions and similar public facilities. The zone is intended to insulate such uses from the deleterious effects of incompatible uses and is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
5.7.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Federal, state, county and city hospitals, institutions, offices and service facilities. 
(b)  Accessory use or building and uses customarily incidental to normal operation of the above uses including recreation, service and rehabilitation facilities. 
(c)  Identification signs not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
Section 5.8. - Central business district, B-1. 
The B-1 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for those retail commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other. This district is intended to serve as the location of sub-regional centers for trade, financial, professional and general office activities. Its primary purpose is to group these uses together in a compact area designed to easily accommodate pedestrian movement. This district is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans of the city. B-1 (central business district) shall be for the downtown area only, being defined by the City of Dublin Zoning Map. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the city council or the planning commission. 
5.8.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the P zone. 
(b)  Any retail, professional, financial or other personal business or service establishment including the manufacturing of articles sold on the premises, provided that such manufacturing occupies less than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area. 
(c)  General communication offices, studios and printing plants. 
(d)  Transportation offices, stations and terminals, provided that there is no interference or hindrance to the free flow of traffic on public streets. 
(e)  Theaters, commercial recreation facilities and museums. 
(f)  Hotels. 
(g)  Restaurants. 
(h)  Wholesale businesses, excluding warehousing or storage facilities. 
(i)  Any advertising sign, provided that it does not advertise a business or service not located on the premises, that if such sign is attached to a building, it does not exceed the width of said building and does not protrude into a public or railroad right-of-way. In no case shall such sign exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. 
(j)  All residential units shall have a minimum of five-hundred fifty (550) square feet, and shall contain their own full bathroom with a sink, toilet and tub or shower, and separate kitchen area with a sink, stove and refrigerator. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code of Ordinances, no residential dwelling in the B-1 Zone shall be required to have any off-street dedicated parking. 
(Ord. No. 03-24, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. 09-05, 3-19-2009; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 5-18-2017; Ord. No. 18-07, 7-19-2018) 
Section 5.9. - Highway-oriented business district, B-2. 
The B-2 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for those commercial facilities which are especially useful in close proximity to residential areas and for those uses which serve the traveling public, without interfering with the free flow of traffic and minimizing the undesirable impact of such uses on the surrounding neighborhood. This district is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.9.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the B-1 and P zones, unless further restricted herein. 
(b)  Automobile service stations, provided that pumps of similar devices are located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way, that all buildings and appurtenances are located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district line and that all fuel is stored underground at least thirty-five (35) feet from any lot line. Curb cuts shall be placed not closer than twenty (20) feet to the intersecting lines of two (2) rights-of-way. 
(c)  Hotels, motels and tourist courts must have a minimum of twenty (20) dwelling units. 
(d)  Plant nurseries and outdoor flower shops. 
(e)  Mortuaries. 
(f)  Buildings in the B-2 (highway-oriented business district), may be constructed with four-hour party walls. 
5.9.2. Conditional uses permitted. 
(a)  Bars, lounges, restaurants and similar establishments serving alcoholic beverages. 
(Amend. No. 50, 8-4-75; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87; Ord. No. 91-2, 1-17-91; Ord. No. 03-25, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-2005) 
Section 5.10. - Neighborhood business district, B-3. 
The B-3 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for those retail businesses which basically serve the surrounding residential neighborhood. This district is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.10.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any retail business selling food and/or convenience goods and services which serve the local neighborhood but not including drive-in restaurants. 
(b)  Professional offices. 
(c)  Drug stores and pharmacies. 
(d)  Flower and gift shops. 
(e)  Fraternal organizations, clubs and lodges. 
(f)  Coin-operated laundromats. 
(g)  Advertising signs as permitted in the P zone, except that such signs may be illuminated with a white light. 
Section 5.11. - Warehousing and light industry district, M-1. 
The M-1 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for light industrial purposes, including accessibility to major transportation facilities, availability of adequate utilities and other public services and availability or large quantities of suitable land. Uses compatible with light industrial development are to be encouraged insofar as they are in accordance with comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.11.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  All light industrial uses which do not cause obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, glare, fire hazard to other objectionable environmental conditions. 
(b)  Bus terminals and bus repair shops. 
(c)  Truck terminals. 
(d)  Laboratories. 
(e)  Wholesale businesses. 
(f)  Bottling and dairy products processing plants. 
(g)  Food products manufacturing. 
(h)  New and used automobile sales. 
(i)  Commercial nurseries and greenhouses. 
(j)  Automobile service stations, provided that they meet the requirements stated in the B-2 district regulations. 
(k)  Restaurants, cafes, grills, drive-in restaurants. 
(l)  Animal hospitals. 
(m)  Storage area excluding junk yards. 
(n)  Commercial parking lots and garages in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.3. 
(o)  Telecommunication antennas and towers. 
(p)  Signs advertising the establishment located on the premises, or the product produced or sold on the premises, as permitted in the C-2 zone. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-4-2010) 
Section 5.11.2. - Conditional uses permitted. 
(a)  Indoor Shooting Ranges, provided the property upon which the Indoor Shooting Range will be located does not touch or is not adjacent to any property zoned residential or to any property with a residential dwelling on it as of the date of the application for the permit for such Indoor Shooting Range. Indoor Shooting Ranges shall be allowed to operate a retail business within the M-2, General Industrial District in conjunction with the operation of the Indoor Shooting Range. 
(Ord. No. 17-14, § 1, 10-5-2017) 
Section 5.12. - General industrial district, M-2. 
The M-2 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for heavy industrial purposes, including accessibility to major transportation facilities, availability of adequate utilities and other public services and availability of large quantities of open land. Uses compatible with light and heavy industrial development are to be encouraged insofar as they are in accordance with comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.12.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the M-1 zone. 
(b)  All heavy industrial uses which do not cause obnoxious noises, vibrations, smoke, gas, odor, dust, glare, fire hazard or other objectionable environmental conditions. 
(c)  Pet boarding kennels (not to include animal breeding facilities), provided that: 
1.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any property zoned for residential purposes, unless all animals are housed at all times within a sound-proof building. 
2.  Animals are not allowed in outdoor areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3.  All outdoor exercise areas are surrounded by solid, opaque fencing a minimum of eight (8) feet high. 
5.12.2. Uses not permitted. Junk yards will not be permitted within the city limits of the City of Dublin. 
Any licensee holding a valid junk dealer license or a valid license to dismantle cars for the purpose of selling second-hand parts at retail as of December 31, 1988, shall be allowed to renew said license at the same location. Transfer of ownership and/or location will not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 89-2, 2-2-89; Ord. No. 10-01, 1-21-2010) 
Section 5.13. - Agricultural district, A-1. 
The A-1 zone is established to preserve and protect those areas within the city which are particularly suited for agricultural purposes. It is the intent of the Agricultural district to provide for the continued existence of agricultural uses in areas within the city limits presently having a predominately rural character and which, because of physical conditions are not suitable for more intensive urban development. The district is required to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive development plans of the city. 
5.13.1. Uses permitted. 
(a)  Horticultural or general farming, truck gardens, cultivation of field crops, orchards, groves or nurseries for growing or propagation of plants, trees and shrubs, including use of heavy cultivating machinery or irrigating machinery provided: 
(1)  Structures for sale or processing of agricultural or nursery products shall not contain a floor area or lot or ground coverage greater than two hundred (200) square feet for each acre of land in the premises in agricultural production. Normal farm accessory buildings such as barns or sheds, shall be exempted from this limitation. 
(b)  Dairy farming, the keeping or raising for sale of fish, birds or poultry and domestic farm animals, large or small, and including structures for processing and sale of products raised on the premises, provided: 
(1)  Any hog raising operation shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential district. 
(2)  Buildings for commercial poultry raising shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential district. 
(3)  Commercial slaughtering or processing of animals or poultry shall not be conducted on the premises. 
(c)  Animal hospitals. 
(d)  Commercial dog kennel, provided: 
(1)  That any open pens, runs, cages or kennels shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential property line. 
(e)  Commercial greenhouses. 
(f)  Private or commercial stable, provided: 
(1)  That any building or structure for keeping of animals shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential district. 
(g)  Single-family residences of owners and/or employees. 
(h)  Vacation cottages, camps and other seasonal uses. 
ARTICLE 6. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Section 6.1. - Area, width, yard and height requirements. 
The area, yard and height requirements for each district are shown in the table following: 

 
*  If a public sewer system is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot, or a community sewage disposal system, may be used when in compliance with the standards of the Laurens County Health Department. Such standards may require a greater minimum lot area and/or width than specified in this Ordinance. 
**  Provided, however, that when a commercial or industrial use abuts an R-District, a minimum twenty-five (25) foot yard and a buffer strip shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 87-27, 9-17-87) 
Section 6.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-16, § 3B., adopted Sept. 18, 2008, repealed § 6.2, which pertained to sign area and height requirements and derived from Ord. No. 94-7, adopted Sept. 15, 1994. 
ARTICLE 7. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-11, adopted June 4, 1979, repealed § 7.1, which pertained to lots of record. Said section derived unchanged from the original zoning ordinance adopted Aug. 25, 1969. 
Section 7.2. - Front yard setback. 
The front yard requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line of structures located along a street within the same block and zoning district, is less than the minimum front yard requirements. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required front yard, but not less than the average of the existing front yards of the aforementioned lots. 
Section 7.3. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of section 6.1 of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flag poles and aerials (except where they conflict with FAA regulation). 
Section 7.4. - Corner lots. 
The side yard requirements for all principal buildings on corner lots shall be such that no corner lot building extends toward the side street more than ten (10) feet beyond the setback line established for buildings fronting on the street considered to be the side street to the corner lot. Accessory buildings shall conform to setback lines established on both streets. 
Section 7.5. - Group housing plan. 
In the case of residential group housing developments of two (2) or more dwellings to be constructed on a plot of ground at least four (4) acres in area, not subdivided into the customary lots and streets, and which will not be subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated lot and street layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this ordinance to individual dwellings in such group developments, the application of the terms of this ordinance may be varied in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, and will insure substantially the same character of occupancy, average intensity of land use and average amount of open space as required by this ordinance in the district in which the proposed group development is to be located, or a smaller lot area per dwelling unit than the minimum required in such district, or a smaller side or front yard, or greater height than is provided for within the district. Uses not permitted within the district in which group housing is to be developed shall not be included. 
Section 7.6. - Community unit plan. 
In the case of community unit developments of two (2) or more residential buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground at least twenty (20) acres in area not subdivided into the customary lots and streets, and which will not be subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated lot and street layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual buildings in such community unit developments, the application of the terms of this ordinance may be varied in a manner that will be in harmony with the area, and will insure that the intent of this ordinance is not violated. Such community unit development plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. This recommendation shall be accompanied by a written report stating the reasons for the recommendation and, if the application is approved, specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed community unit plan meets the following conditions: 
(a)  The property adjacent to the area in the plan will not be adversely affected. 
(b)  The buildings shall be used only for those uses permitted in the district for which the land is zoned, provided, however, that all such permitted uses shall be for the residents within the area of the community unit plan. 
(c)  The average lot area per dwelling unit contained in the site, exclusive of the area occupied by streets shall not be less than ninety (90) percent of the lot area per dwelling unit required in the district in which the development is located. 
(d)  The existing landscaping features are retained wherever possible. Included among landscaping features are ponds, streams, lakes, trees and similar features. The plan shall designate by appropriate symbol the location of existing trees to be retained. For the purpose of this provision a tree with a diameter of at least ten (10) inches shall be considered worth retaining. 
7.6.1. If the Mayor and City Council [Board of Aldermen] approve such a community unit plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of land and the location and height of buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located. However, no building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued unless the proposed construction conforms to the standards set forth in the approved community unit plan. 
Section 7.7. - Public development projects. 
Any urban renewal project that has been officially approved by the Planning Commission and City Council [Board of Aldermen] shall be designated as an urban renewal area. The land and building development standards incorporated as a part of the Urban Renewal Plan and Disposition Agreement arrived at in connection with the resale of property within the designated urban renewal area shall be those standards set forth in this ordinance. 
7.7.1. Any public housing project which has been officially approved by the Planning Commission and City Council [Board of Aldermen] shall be designated a Public Housing Area. The land and building development standards arrived at in connection with the Public Housing Area shall be those standards set forth in this ordinance. 
Section 7.8. - Manufactured home parks. 
In any district in which manufactured home parks are permitted, the following regulations and minimum standards shall apply: 
7.8.1. The park shall be no less than six (6) acres in size, and be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure positive drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
7.8.2. Manufactured home spaces or lots shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet for each space which shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide and clearly defined; provided, that where at least seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet of contiguous open space is set aside for a recreation area, playground area or any open space use the Planning Commission deem fit and proper, it is permissible to reduce the minimum area of the manufactured home space or lot by an area not to exceed four hundred (400) square feet. 
7.8.3. Manufactured homes shall be harbored on each space so that there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet of clearance between manufactured homes, provided, that with respect to manufactured homes parked end-to-end, clearance shall not be less than ten (10) feet to any building within the park or to any property line bounding the park. 
7.8.4. There shall be an area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet set aside for an outbuilding which will contain services needed by the manufactured home resident. Examples of such services are an office for the manufactured home park manager, a laundry, vending machines and storage space. 
7.8.5. In the case of a manufactured home park larger than the minimum acreage or in the case of expansion of the park, when the option of open space has been accepted, two hundred (200) square feet on common space shall be added for each manufactured home unit. 
7.8.6. All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a paved surface driveway not less than twenty (20) feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a street; all manufactured home space shall be serviced with walkways not less than two (2) feet wide. 
7.8.7. All driveways and walkways within the park shall be lighted to provide safe, convenient access to all parts of the park during the evening hours. 
7.8.8. An electrical outlet supplying at least two hundred forty (240) volts, one hundred (100) amperes shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Power lines over the manufactured home shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet above any manufactured home unit. 
7.8.9. Surrounding the park (excepting only ingress and egress points) there shall be a planting easement of at least fifteen (15) feet upon which buildings shall not be permitted and which shall be planted and permanently maintained in trees and shrubbery that will within five (5) years after planting, be six (6) feet in height and obscure objects behind the easement at a distance of fifty (50) feet. The property owner(s) shall have the responsibility of maintaining the trees and shrubbery surrounding the park. 
7.8.10. Drainage and public utilities plans shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and he shall advise the Planning Commission of his findings, in writing prior to the Commission's making a formal recommendation on the proposal. 
7.8.11. Plans for a manufactured home park must also be reviewed and approved by the Laurens County Health Department, which body shall advise the Planning Commission, in writing, prior to the Commission's making a formal recommendation. The proposed plan shall not receive a favorable recommendation unless the Laurens County Health Department certifies that the proposed development meets all local and state health requirements. 
(Ord. No. 79-28, § 1, 10-2-79; Ord. No. 06-15, § 5, 10-19-2006) 
Section 7.9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-15, § 6, adopted Oct. 19, 2006, repealed § 7.9, which pertained to double wide mobile homes and derived from Ord. No. 78-28, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 1978. 
ARTICLE 7A. - CONDITIONAL USES, PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1980, enacted provisions designated as Art. 8 of App. A, which provisions have been redesignated, with the permission of the city, as Art. 7A. 

Section 7A.1. - Authority of planning commission. 
The Planning Commission by conditional use permit may, after a public hearing, authorize the location of any use which is identified in the district regulations of this zoning ordinance and its amendments as permitted (conditional) uses. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80) 
Section 7A.2. - Application for conditional use permit and fees. 
Application forms for conditional use permits shall be obtained from the City Clerk's Office. The form shall be accompanied by detailed plans showing exact lot size; location and size of buildings; structure or improvements to be placed on site; the specific use of each building, structure, property or part thereof; detailed arrangement of required parking spaces; location of means of ingress and egress and, when necessary, topographical information to indicate status of the complete site. The same detailed information shall be required where existing structures are to be used or altered under the term of this article. All applications for a Conditional Use Permit shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of the date of application and the applicant shall be provided with either a written notice of approval or denial, except that this time may be extended where the applicant agrees in writing to a waiver of this provision. Notices of permit denial shall include a statement of reasons for denial. All conditional use permits shall be accompanied by a seventy-five-dollar fee payable to the city to defray the cost of processing. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87) 
Section 7A.3. - Public hearing. 
Before a conditional use permit is issued, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be posted at the City Hall and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80) 
Section 7A.4. - Signs. 
Whenever a conditional use permit application is submitted, the Building Inspector shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question one (1) or more signs, each of which shall not be less than four (4) square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed use and the date, place and time of public hearing. No such public hearing shall take place until said sign or signs have been posted for at least fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80; Ord. No. 87-22, 8-20-87) 
Section 7A.5. - Consideration of use effect. 
Before the issuance of a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall make a decision regarding the effect of a conditional use or building upon the character of the neighborhood (in which it is proposed for location), traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80) 
Section 7A.6. - Conditional use restrictions. 
In addition to the conditional use requirements provided in this article and in district regulations and where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to permit the proposed use to be in harmony with the existing development and other matters essential to the public interest, health and welfare, the Planning Commission may require as part of its approval, certain other performance or design considerations including, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Planted or wooden screen buffers to reduce adverse or potentially adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
(b)  The location, design or limitation of street accessways, parking areas and loading docks. 
(c)  Increases in the district requirements for lot size and building line setbacks, but not a reduction of these requirements. 
(d)  The rearrangement of structures on the development site. 
(e)  Limitations on the hours of business operation when it can be shown that proposed operational times would cause adverse effect on adjoining, existing uses. 
(f)  Specified distances from existing residential, public or institutional developments. 
In no case, however, shall the Planning Commission exempt any conditional use from meeting the minimum lot and structure requirements of this article or of the district in which the proposed use is located. 
The Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-35, § 1, 12-18-80) 
ARTICLE 7B. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Section 7B.10. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Dublin recognizes that the development of wireless service technology is an asset to economic development as well as providing significant benefits to residents, and wishes to be a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. However, the City of Dublin also finds that the siting wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character, and environment of Dublin and its inhabitants. Towers that are much taller than surrounding structures are found to have a significant negative visual impact. The placement of towers, especially near residential areas, is found to have possible negative effects on the value of surrounding properties. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are to: 
A.  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
B.  Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
C.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
D.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual and economic impact of the towers and antennas; 
E.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
F.  Resolve any conflicts in the siting of towers and antennas between the existing zoning ordinance and the requirements of state or federal laws and regulations; 
G.  Insure that the Ordinances of the City of Dublin do not unreasonably discriminate among telecommunication service providers, do not prohibit personal wireless services, and do not limit placement of wireless facilities based upon environmental effects of radio frequency emissions; 
H.  Provide a forum to ensure conflicts between the development of advanced wireless communication and the concerns of the community are quickly resolved; 
I.  Protect the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Dublin and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.20. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Height: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, amateur or "ham" radio towers, and the like. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.30. - Applicability. 
The requirements set forth in the City of Dublin Zoning Ordinance shall generally govern the height and location of towers and antennas. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures therein shall apply to towers and antennas, except for those towers or antennas located in the M-1 and M-2 zones, which shall be governed by any applicable Federal or State height laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.40. - General requirements. 
(a)  Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide to the Planning and Zoning Department an inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the City of Dublin or within three (3) miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The Planning and Zoning Department may share such information with other applicants or organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the City of Dublin, provided, however that the Planning and Zoning Department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(b)  Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of all agencies of the federal or state government. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations as mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the City of Dublin shall be in the manner provided in the Code of the City of Dublin for the removal of nuisances. 
(c)  Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City of Dublin concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the City of Dublin may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the City of Dublin shall be in the manner provided Code of the City of Dublin for the removal of nuisances. 
(d)  Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(e)  Anti-climbing device. Towers shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(f)  Landscaping. Tower facilities for which a variance is required and which are located in any residential area shall be landscaped with a buffer of evergreen plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. Existing mature tree and shrub growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, existing natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. Tower locations shall be kept mowed and litter-free, as required by city ordinance. 
(g)  Setbacks and Separation. Towers must be set back either the minimum zoning district setback or at least one hundred twenty-five (125) per cent of total height of the tower (whichever is greater) from the property line of any residentially zoned property and all towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(h)  The City of Dublin shall act on any request for authorization to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed, taking into account the nature and scope of such request. 
(i)  The initial application shall be to the Zoning Administrator and shall be approved or denied within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.50. - Variances. 
(a)  Where anyone is unable to locate a desired tower due to zoning or other regulations of the City of Dublin, and Federal or State law has pre-empted local regulation, the person may request a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals. In granting a variance for a tower, the Board may impose conditions to the extent necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. Any information of an engineering nature submitted by the applicant, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Information Required. Each applicant requesting a variance under this ordinance shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and/or other documentation, signed and sealed by licensed professional engineers, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the City of Dublin to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. The applicant shall submit copies of any required Federal or State licenses for operation of the requested facility. Where the application is incomplete, the City shall so notify the applicant within a reasonable time of submission. 
(c)  Factors Considered in Granting Variances. The Board shall consider, in addition to the factors mandated by the Code, the following factors in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  Height of the proposed tower. 
2.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries. 
3.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties. 
4.  Surrounding topography. 
5.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage. 
6.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
7.  Requirements imposed by Federal or State laws and regulations which may in whole or in part pre-empt local regulation. The Board shall not consider any factor that is barred by federal or state law or regulation (such as, at the time of the passage of this ordinance, health concerns caused by RF emissions). 
8.  The possibility of using alternatives such as manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunication antennas or towers. 
9.  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures. The applicant must demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can reasonably accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, or costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
10.  Whether the denial of the variance unreasonably discriminates among providers of functionally equivalent services. 
11.  Whether the denial of the variance will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services. 
12.  Whether the manner in which the applicant proposes to fill the gap in wireless services is the least intrusive on the community values protected by this ordinance. 
13.  In the case of federally licensed amateur or "ham" radio operators, the minimum practical regulation needed to accomplish the legitimate regulatory purposes of the ordinance, and to reasonably accommodate the location of the needed antenna, pursuant to federal law and regulation, in particular 47 CFR 97.15, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and any rules and regulations relating thereto. 
(d)  Upon receiving a completed application, the Board shall hold a public hearing within a reasonable time. The public hearing shall be advertised one (1) time in the official legal organ at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing. All interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present evidence. The Board may allow interested persons to submit written evidence after the hearing. 
(e)  Within a reasonable time after the close of evidence the Board shall issue a written order supported by substantial evidence giving its decision and the reasons therefore. The order, which may in part consist of the minutes of any meetings or public hearings, shall clearly delineate the issues that arose with the application; provide the evidence presented by all sides; illustrate the concerns of the applicants, the residents and property owners of the area, and the board members; and shall cite the specific provisions of the ordinance that the voting members found were relevant in their decision on the application. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.60. - Deadlines for decisions. 
All decisions for co-locations shall be rendered in writing no later than ninety (90) days after receiving a completed application. All other wireless facility siting application decisions shall be rendered in writing no later than one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a completed application. However, where the applicant has been notified within thirty (30) days after filing that its application is incomplete, these time periods shall be automatically tolled, and shall not include the time that the applicant takes to respond to requests for additional information. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.70. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
Any antenna or tower that ceases to operate for a period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the City of Dublin notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
Section 7B.80. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 11-4-2010) 
ARTICLE 8. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 8.1. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector, who shall have authority to make inspections of buildings and lands necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Section 8.2. - Building permit required. 
No building or other structure shall be constructed, erected, moved, added to or structurally altered in any way without a building permit issued in advance. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. The building permit shall be valid for six (6) months, unless fifty (50) per cent or more of the construction has taken place within that period of time; in such case, the building permit shall be valid for an additional six (6) months. 
8.2.1. In applying to the Building Inspector for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a scaled plot plan indicating the actual dimensions of the lot to be built on, the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of all existing buildings and structures on the lot. The applicant shall also state the present and proposed uses of such buildings and supply such other information as may be required by the Building Inspector for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 8.3. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. All occupants of nonconforming uses created by the passage of, and subsequent amendments to, this ordinance shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this ordinance or its amendments. 
Section 8.4. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 00-9, 3-16-2000) 
Section 8.5. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Building Inspector or any aggrieved citizen may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land. 
Section 8.6. - Development standards for R-5. 
A planned residential development shall conform to the following restrictions and development standards: 
(a)  Minimum area . The minimum tract of land eligible for development under R-5 zoning, high density residential development shall be five (5) acres. Notwithstanding Section 10.5 of this Appendix A, for tracts of land or any combination of adjacent tracts of land already within the corporate limits of the City of Dublin as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance amendment with less than five (5) acres, but at least one (1) acre of land, a variance to the minimum area requirement herein may be granted subject to section (d) below. 
(b)  Density . A high density residential development shall be allowed only in R-5 districts with the following maximum density for each district: 
Development, five (5) acres or more : Eight (8) units per acre. 
Development, less than five (5) acres but at least one (1) acre : Six (6) units per acre. 
(c)  Minimum floor area . The minimum gross square footage of heated area in each of the R-5 districts shall be one-thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(d)  Variance requirements . If the Board of Zoning Appeals grants any variance allowed herein, said variance may only be granted with the following conditions for the R-5 zoned area: 
(1)  Regardless of surrounding zoning, if the existing houses adjacent to the subject property are all detached, the variance may only be granted conditioned on the development being limited to detached single family housing, and not attached; 
(2)  The development shall provide for a turnaround pad for each house which will allow for backing motor vehicles on the driveway and not onto any city street. 
(3)  The entire development shall have a privacy fence erected between it and all surrounding parcels of land; 
(4)  Any other condition which is deemed appropriate by the Board of Zoning Appeals based on the location of the proposed development and the surrounding existing use must be imposed in order to preserve the integrity of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 87-27, 9-17-87; Ord. No. 18-14, 12-13-2018) 
Cross reference— High density residential development, R-5, app. A, § 5.45. 
ARTICLE 9. - HISTORIC DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1979, specifically amended App. A by adding Art. 9, §§ 9.1—9.13, and renumbering former arts. 9—12 as arts. 10—13, as hereinafter set out. 

Section 9.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Historic District shall be to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the city through the preservation and development of its historic, culture and aesthetic resources. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.2. - Boundaries. 
The Boundaries of the Historic District shall be as shown on a map entitled "Historic District Map of the City of Dublin," which, along with all notations, references and explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. A copy of the Historic District Map of the City of Dublin shall be certified by the City Clerk; shall bear the date of adoption of this ordinance/ and shall be kept on display in the office of the Building Inspector. The map shall show the following Historic District areas: 
(a)  Bellevue Avenue: The boundaries of the Bellevue Avenue Historic District area shall be an area generally bounded on the west by Lancaster Street; on the north-south by Bellevue Avenue (to include properties located on both sides of Bellevue Avenue); on the east by Church Street; 
(b)  Downtown: The boundaries of the Downtown Historic District area shall be an area generally bounded as follows; Beginning at the Intersection of West Gaines Street and Church Street, go east along Gaines Street to its intersection with Franklin Street; then south on Franklin Street to Jackson Street; then east along Jackson Street to South Washington Street; then south along Washington Street to its intersection with the Dublin Bypass/MLK Junior Blvd at the southerly line of the railroad right of way; then west along Dublin Bypass/MLK Junior Blvd/U.S. Hwy. 319 and 441/Telfair Street to its intersection with Rowe Street; then north on Rowe Street to the northerly right of way of the railroad line, (and including the property of the Saint Paul AME Church fronting on the westerly side of Rowe Street); then east along the northern railroad right of way to its intersection with Church Street; then north along Church Street to its intersection with Gaines Street the point of beginning, and including all those parcels of land which front on either side of Church Street between Madison Street and Academy Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.3. - Relationship to zoning districts and advertising ordinance. 
The Historic District regulations within this article are intended to preserve and protect the historic or architecturally significant building, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, and neighborhoods in the historic district. In all zoning districts lying within the boundaries of the Historic District the regulations of both the zoning district, the Advertising Ordinance and the Historic District shall apply. Whenever there is a conflict between the regulations of the zoning district and the regulations of the Historic District, the zoning regulations shall prevail. Whenever there is a conflict between the regulations of the Advertising and Sign Regulation Ordinance (Dublin Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3) and the regulations of the Historic District, any additional requirements of the Historic District Ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 2, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.4. - Historic District Review Board—Establishment and composition. 
A Historic District Review Board is hereby established. It shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and Council, each [of] whom shall be either citizens of the city or owners of property in a Historic District, and who shall serve without pay. The term of appointment shall be three (3) years, except of those first appointed two (2) shall be appointed for one year, two (2) for two (2) years, and one for three (3) years. Special qualifications of the members would include a special interest, education, or experience in history, architecture, landscape design or urban development. One appointment shall be reserved for the Dublin Downtown Development Authority, which shall designate one of their members to serve on the Historic Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 3, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.5. - Same—Proceedings. 
The Historic District Review Board Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, each of whom shall serve for one year or until they are re-elected or successors are elected. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings. The Secretary, appointed by the Board, shall keep minutes of the proceedings of all meetings, including all transactions, actions, examinations, votes, abstinences, and absences of the Board, and those who appear before it. The minutes of all meetings shall, at all times, be filed in the office of the City Clerk and be part of the public record. The meetings shall be at the call of the Chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.6. - Same—Jurisdiction. 
The Board's jurisdiction shall be limited to the Historic District. The Board shall be concerned with those elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and/or preservation that affect visual quality of the Historic District. They shall not consider detailed design, interior arrangements or building features not subject to public view nor shall they make any requirement except for the purpose of preventing development or demolition obviously incongruous to the Historic District surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.7. - Duties and responsibilities of Historic District Commission. 
The Board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(a)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(b)  Recommend to the Mayor and Council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(c)  Review applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(d)  Recommend to the Mayor and Council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure or work of art as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(e)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (Georgia Law 1976, p. 1181); 
(f)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(g)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the Mayor and Council or the Commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of this Act; 
(h)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired. 
(i)  Shall by resolution set a time and place to hold a regular monthly meeting. The chairman of the committee, or in his absence or sickness, the then presiding officer, may call, cancel or reschedule a meeting at any time upon giving notice to each member of the board. It shall be the duty of each member of the Board to attend all meetings when possible. 
(j)  May adopt guidelines or guides to further explain, clarify and give examples of those design standards which are in compliance with this ordinance, with approval of the Mayor and City Council. 
The city shall provide any technical, administrative, and clerical assistance required by the Board. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 4, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.8. - Classification of buildings and structures. 
Within the Historic District, all buildings and structures shall be classified and designated on the Historic District Map adopted and approved by the Mayor and Council, and made a part of the zoning map. Such buildings and structures shall be divided into two (2) classes: 
(a)  Historic: Those buildings classified as Historic shall possess identified historical or architectural merit of degree warranting their preservation. They shall be further classified as: 
a.  Exceptional; 
b.  Excellent; 
c.  Notable; 
d.  Of value as part of the scene. 
(b)  Contemporary: Those buildings and structures not classified on the Historic Map as exceptional, excellent, notable, or of value as part of the scene. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.9. - Certificate of Appropriateness required. 
A Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Review Board shall be required before a city permit is issued by the Building Inspector for any of the following: 
(a)  Demolition of a historic building; 
(b)  Relocation of a historic building; 
(c)  Material change in the exterior appearance of existing buildings classified as Historic by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change; and 
(d)  Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure subject to view from a public street; 
(e)  Change in existing walls and fences, or construction of way[s], excluding lanes; 
(f)  Material change in the exterior appearance of existing contemporary buildings by additions, reconstructions, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change, if subject to view from a public street. 
(g)  Material change to, or new construction of, exterior signage. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 5, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.10. - Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made in the Building Inspector's Office on forms provided therefore, at said office. Detailed drawings, plans, or specifications shall not be required, but each application shall be accompanied by such sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions or other information showing the proposed exterior alterations, additions, changes or new construction as are reasonably required for the Board of Review and Building Inspector to make a decision. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.11. - Action of application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(a)  The Building Inspector shall transmit the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, together with the supporting information and material, to the Board of Review for Approval. The Board of Review shall act upon the application within thirty (30) days after the filing thereof, otherwise the application shall be deemed to be approved and a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time where mutual agreement has been made and the Board of Review may advise the applicant and make recommendations in regards to the appropriateness. 
(b)  If the Board of Review approves the application, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued. If the Certificate of Appropriateness is issued, the application shall be processed in the same manner as application for building or demolition permits. If the Board of Review disapproves the application, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be issued. The Board shall state its reason in writing and the Building Inspector shall advise the applicant and a city permit shall not be issued. 
(c)  After a city permit has been granted by the Building Inspector in accordance with the above procedures, he shall, from time to time, make field inspections of the construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or repair so authorized and shall take such action as is necessary to assure compliance with the approved Certificate of Appropriateness Application. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.12. - Denial of Certificate of Appropriateness; appeals. 
Where a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied by the Board, and therefore the Building Inspector cannot issue a city permit, an appeal can be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals. A hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals may be obtained by appealing the denial of a city permit in the same manner as prescribed by this ordinance for any other appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 9.13. - Development standards. 
(a)  Preservation of historic buildings in the Historic District. A building or structure, classified as historic, or any part thereof or any appurtenance related thereto, including but not limited to stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and signs, shall only be moved, reconstructed, altered or maintained in a manner that will preserve the historical and architectural character of the building structure or appurtenance thereto. 
(b)  Demolition of historic buildings. Whenever a property owner shows that a building classified as historic is incapable of earning an economic return on its value as appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser, and the Board of Review fails to approve the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, such building may be demolished; provided, however, that before a demolition permit is issued, notice of proposed demolition shall be given as follows: 
(1)  For buildings rated exceptional, eight (8) months; 
(2)  For buildings rated excellent, six (6) months; 
(3)  For buildings rated notable, four (4) months; 
(4)  For buildings of value as part of the scene, two (2) months. 
Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three (3) times prior to demolition, the final notice of which shall be not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the permit, and the first notice of which shall be published not more than fifteen (15) days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed. The purpose of this section is to further the purpose of this ordinance by preserving historic buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the economic values of the city, and to afford the city, interested persons, historical societies or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. The Board may at any time during such stay approve a Certificate of Appropriateness, in which event a permit shall be issued without further delay. 
(c)  Relocation of historic buildings. A historic building shall not be relocated to another site unless it is shown that the preservation on its existing site is not consistent with the purposes of such site. 
(d)  Protective maintenance of historic buildings. Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the Minimum Housing Code and the Building Code of the City. 
(e)  Contemporary buildings. The construction of a new building, or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance or repair involving a color change materially affecting the external appearance of any existing contemporary building, structure, or appurtenance thereof within the district shall be generally of such design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture, color, location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the Historic District, and particularly with buildings designated as historic and with blocks and places to which it is visually related. 
(f)  Visual compatibility factors. Within said district, new construction and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed in color shall be visually compatible with buildings, blocks and places to which it is visually related generally in terms of the following factors; 
(1)  Height: The height of proposed building shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. 
(2)  Proportion of buildings' front facade: The relationship of the width of building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible to buildings, blocks and places to which it is visually related. 
(3)  Proportion of openings within the facility: The relationship of the width of the windows to height of windows in a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, blocks and places to which the building is visually related. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to void in front facades: The relationship of solids to void in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, blocks and places to which it is visually related. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets: The relationship of building to open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible to the buildings, blocks and places to which it is visually related. 
(6)  Rhythm on entrance and/or porch projection: The relationship of entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building shall be visually compatible to the buildings, blocks and places to which it is visually related. 
(7)  Relationship of material, texture and color: The relationship of materials, textures and color of the facade of a building shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related. 
(8)  Roof shapes: The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related. 
(9)  Walls of continuity: Appurtenances of a building such as wall, wrought iron, fences, evergreen landscape masses, building facades, shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to insure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings, blocks, and places to which it is visually related. 
(10)  Scale of a building: The size of a building, the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, the windows, doors, openings, porches, and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings, blocks, and places to which it is visually related. 
(11)  Directional expression of front elevation: A building shall be visually compatible with the buildings, blocks, and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character or non-directional character. 
(g)  Signs. All signs in any Historic District shall comply with the applicable Zoning regulations, applicable Advertising and Sign regulations, and shall comply with the Development Standards and other requirements of the Historic District Ordinance, including any guidelines adopted by the Board to further explain, clarify and give examples of those standards. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 14-07, § 6, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.14. - Proceedings to prevent changes not in compliance. 
The City of Dublin or the historic review board shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of the City of Dublin Historic District Ordinance, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 7, 9-4-2014) 
Section 9.15. - Violations; penalties; continuing offense. 
Violations of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day a violation of this article is committed or allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 8, 9-4-2014) 
ARTICLE 10. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See editor's footnote to Art. 9. 

Section 10.1. - Same, establishment. 
A board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established. It shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom are citizens of the city, and who shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the course of their duties. The members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed by Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council. All members who have served on said Board shall be eligible for reappointment to succeed themselves. The term of any member of the Board in office on the effective date of this Ordinance and the term of any member appointed to the Board prior to the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Council to be held in March, 1979, shall expire upon the appointment and qualification of a successor. 
At the first regular meeting of Mayor and Council held in March, 1979, the five (5) members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed or reappointed for terms as set forth in the section. 
At the first regular meeting of Mayor and Council held in March, 1979, all five (5) members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed or reappointed for initial terms of one, two (2), or three (3) years. At the time of appointment, at the first meeting of the Mayor and Council in March, 1979, one member shall be appointed for one year, two (2) members shall be appointed for two (2) years, and two (2) members shall be appointed for three (3) years. Thereafter, the terms of all members shall be three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 79-3, § 1, 2-19-79; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 10.2. - Same, proceedings. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman, each of whom shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or a successor is elected. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings. The Secretary, appointed by the Board, shall keep minutes of the proceedings of all meetings, including all transactions, actions, examinations, votes, abstinences, and absences of the Board and those who appear before it. The minutes of all meetings shall, at all times, be filed in the office of the City Clerk and be part of the public record. The Chairman and the Vice-Chairman shall have the power to administer oaths, and cause to have issued subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 10.3. - Appeals, hearings, notice. 
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the Building Inspector. Such appeals shall be taken not more than thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the Building Inspector and with the Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Forms adequate for stating such appeals shall be made available by the Building Inspector. Following an appeal of his decision, the Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
10.3.1. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal. Written public notice including posting of such notice at the City Hall and publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation shall be given at least three days prior to the date of hearing. Any party of interest may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(Amend. No. 49, 8-4-75; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 10.4. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a Court of Record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 10.5. - Powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the requirements of this ordinance that, owing to special conditions, a case, results in unnecessary hardship; provided that such variance is not contrary to the public interest and intent of this ordinance. A variance may be granted in such individual cases upon a finding by the Board that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property, building or structure in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The literal application of the provisions of this ordinance to the particular property, building or structure would create an unnecessary hardship; and, 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular property, building or structure, and not to other such property in the district; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public welfare, or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance. Provided, however, that no variance be granted for a use of such property, building or structure prohibited by this ordinance; 
(5)  Such conditions be not caused by action or inaction of the owner or any previous owner of the property, building or structure in question. 
(6)  Sign variances: 
a.  Variances are void if structural changes are made to the sign. 
b.  Grandfathering of a variance is void five (5) years after date of annexation. 
c.  Variances are nontransferable when property ownership changes. 
d.  If signs are not maintained and become an eyesore, the zoning board has the right to revoke the variance following a ninety-day notification period. 
(Ord. No. 78-28, § 5, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 91-16, 11-7-91; Ord. No. 06-15, § 7, 10-19-2006) 
Section 10.6. - Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
In exercising the above powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as sought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter which it is required to pass on under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in this ordinance. 
10.6.1. Applications to the Board of Appeals which are denied shall not be resubmitted for consideration of the denied application for a period of six (6) months from the date the application was denied. Such application will be reconsidered by the Board of Zoning Appeals only upon the presentation of new evidence to justify the resubmission. 
(Ord. No. 79-14, § 1, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 10.7. - Appeals from the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Any person, or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals or any department of the municipality may seek review of such decision by a Court of Record, as specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
ARTICLE 11. - AMENDMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— See editor's footnote to Art. 11. 

Section 11.1. - Amendments. 
This zoning ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map, may be amended from time to time by the City Council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it has first been submitted to the Planning Commission for review, public hearing and recommendation or has been proposed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days in which to submit a report on amendments referred to it. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within this period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 87-9, 4-16-87) 
Section 11.2. - Initiation of amendments. 
Application to amend this zoning ordinance of the City of Dublin may be in the form of proposals to amend the Official Zoning Map or proposals to amend the text of the ordinance. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by the Planning Commission, or be submitted to the Planning Commission by the City Council or by the property owner. Unless initiated by the Planning Commission or the City Council, all applications for map amendments must be submitted by the owner of such property or the authorized agent of the owner. Such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application to amend the text of the city's zoning ordinance may be initiated by the Planning Commission or be submitted to the Planning Commission by the City Council or by any person having an interest in the city. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 1978, specifically amended App, A by repealing former §§ 10.2—10.5, and enacted in lieu thereof new §§ 10.2—10.7, redesignated as §§ 11.2—11.7. Said former sections pertained to the same subject matter, and had derived unchanged from the original zoning ordinance adopted Aug. 25, 1969. See editor's footnote to Art. 9 title. 
Section 11.3. - Application procedure. 
Application forms for amendment requests shall be obtained from the City Clerk's Office. Completed forms, together with an application fee to cover administrative cost, plus any additional information that the applicant feels to be pertinent, will be filed with the City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Note— See editor's note following § 11.2. 
Section 11.4. - Applicable fees. 
An application to amend this ordinance shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the city clerk to defray the cost of processing and required advertising fees: 
Zoning Map Amendments for (variance, annexation, rezoning, conditional use, etc.) ..... $150.00 
Text Amendments ..... 150.00 
Advertising Fees (subject to applicable rate charged by the Legal Organ.) 
A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 87-9, 4-16-87; Ord. No. 98-3, 4-2-98; Ord. No. 03-23, 8-21-2003) 
Note— See editor's note following § 11.2. 
Section 11.5. - Frequency of applications for zoning map amendments. 
A property owner or his agent shall not initiate an application for a rezoning map amendment affecting the same parcel more often than once every twelve (12) months nor resubmit a withdrawn application more often than once every six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 87-23, 8-20-87) 
Note— See editor's note following § 11.2. 
Section 11.6. - Public hearing. 
Whenever an application is initiated to amend the Zoning Map, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Before enactment of any amendment to this ordinance, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days' notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be posted at City Hall and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the County. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 87-9, 4-16-87) 
Note— See editor's note following § 11.2. 
Section 11.7. - Signs. 
Whenever an application is initiated to amend the Zoning Map from one zoning classification to another, the Building Inspector shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property to be rezoned, one or more signs each of which shall not be less than four (4) square feet in area and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date, place and time of public hearing. No such public hearing shall take place until said sign or signs have been posted for at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days. 
(Ord. No. 78-30, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 87-9, 4-16-87) 
Note— See editor's note following § 11.2. 
ARTICLE 12. - DEFINITION OF TERMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See editor's footnote to Art. 9 title. 

Section 12.1. - Definition of terms. 
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance shall carry their customary dictionary definitions. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
"Map" means the "Official Zoning Map, City of Dublin, Georgia." 
The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, trust, company, association, organization, individual, co-partnership, or corporation. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or buildings shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Accessory, use or structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. Accessory structures shall not include living quarters. 
Alley: A narrow service way dedicated to public use providing a secondary public means of access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration of building: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns, girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
Animal clinic: An establishment where small animals of the size and species of dogs and cats, and the like, are given short-term medical or surgical treatment with only short-term boarding, as is essential and necessary as to effectuate a cure. 
Apartment house: See Multiple-Family Dwelling. 
Boarding and breeding kennels: A building or property where dogs and/or other small animals are kept, sheltered or boarded, either for or without compensation. 
Boarding, rooming or lodging house: A dwelling other than a hotel having one kitchen and used for the purpose of providing meals or lodging or both for compensation to persons other than members of the family occupying such dwelling. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building height: The vertical distance from the mean finished grade to the highest point of the building. The height of a wall is the vertical distance from grade to the mean level of the top of the wall, including any dormers or gables on the wall. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Clinic: A clinic is an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one person or group of persons practicing any form of healing or health building services to individuals whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists or any such profession, the practice of which is lawful. 
Club: Buildings and facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association of persons for social or recreational purposes but not operated primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily conducted as a business. 
Drive-in restaurant: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or nonalcoholic beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on the premises. 
Dump: A lot or area of land, or part thereof, used primarily for the disposal, by abandonment, dumping, burial or burning of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery or equipment, vehicles or parts thereof, or of any kind of waste material. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including hotels or motels. 
Dwelling unit: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family; also, Dwelling, one-family. 
Dwelling, two-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families, with separate housekeeping or cooking facilities for each family. 
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each family. 
Family: One (1) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel. 
Filling station: See service station. 
Garage apartment: An accessory building, not a part of or attached to the main building, a portion of which contains living quarters and space for at least one (1) automobile. 
Garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of the principal building, used for storage of automobiles of the occupants of the principal building; a carport is a private garage. 
Garage, public: A garage other than a private garage, available to the public, operated for gain and which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other vehicles. 
Garage, storage: A building or operation thereof designed or used exclusively for the storage or parking of automobiles. Services other than storage at such storage garage shall be limited to refueling, washing, waxing and polishing. 
Home occupation: An occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises, and conducted entirely within the dwelling, provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
Hotel, or motor hotel: A building or other structure kept, used or maintained and advertised as or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay, catering primarily to transient guests, in which ten or more rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests, and having or not having one or more dining rooms, restaurants or cafes where meals are served to transient or other guests; such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms, restaurants and cafes, if existing, being conducted in the same building or accessory buildings in connection therewith. 
Junk yard: An open area where waste, used or second hand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, salvaged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, cloth, paper, rags, bags, plumbing or electrical fixtures or appliances, tires, batteries, bottles, glass, automobiles and auto parts. (This does not include Used Car Lots, or the temporary storage of wrecked vehicles awaiting insurance adjustment.) 
Laundromat, (self-service laundry): A business rendering a retail service by renting to the individual customer the temporary use of stationary equipment for the self-service of washing, drying and otherwise processing of laundry and dry-cleaning with such equipment to be serviced and its use and operation supervised by the management. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied, or designed to be occupied by one principal building or use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as required by this ordinance. 
Lot, corner: A parcel of land at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets. 
Lot, depth: The depth of a lot is the distance measured in the direction of the side lines of the lot from mid-point of the opposite rear line of the lot. 
Lot, front: That portion of a lot abutting a street right-of-way. On corner lots the front shall be that portion of the lot having the least horizontal distance as measured along each of the abutting street rights-of-way. Through lots shall be considered as having two (2) fronts. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, lines: The lines outlining the boundaries of a lot or parcel of land. 
Lot, rear: That portion of a lot lying at the opposite end to the front of a lot. 
Lot, through: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
Lot, width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the front "set-back" line. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Laurens County, Georgia; or a parcel of land, the Deed of which has been recorded in the office of said Clerk in Laurens County, Georgia. 
Major recreational equipment: Boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Manufactured home park: A parcel of land or any portion thereof which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two (2) or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and which has not been inspected and approved as meeting the requirements of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). A mobile home is distinguished from a manufactured home as defined herein. 
Modular home: Any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site, and which is designed and constructed to conform to the local building code rather than a national housing or construction code. For purpose of this ordinance, a modular home that meets the local building code shall be considered the same as a detached, single-family dwelling and permitted under the same zoning districts as a detached, single-family dwelling. 
Motel, (motor court): A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers, providing for accessory off-street parking facilities and having individual unit entrances, opening to the outside. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as auto courts, tourist courts, motor lodges and similar appellations. 
Nonconforming use: The Use of a building, structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance, and which does not conform to the Use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nursing (convalescent) home: A home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided for with food and shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Parking space, off-street: For the purposes of this ordinance, an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another. 
For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at three hundred (300) square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case and in accordance with all ordinances and regulations of the city. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted or drawn by another vehicle. This term includes motorized homes, motorized campers, pick-up campers, travel trailers, camping trailers, and tent trailers, among others. 
Service station: Any building, structure or land used for dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
Street: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. This includes avenue, road, lane, drive or other means of ingress or egress regardless of the term used for designation. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
Structural alterations: Any change, except for repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, joists, rafters, etc. 
Temporary housing: Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities systems on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Use: The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained. 
Yard: A required open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from ground level upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, front: (Front set-back line) A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest wall or column line of the building. 
Yard, rear: (Rear set-back line) A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest wall or column line of the building. 
Yard, side: (Side set-back line) A yard extending along the side or a lot between the front yard and the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the nearest wall or column line of the building. 
(Ord. No. 78-28, § 3, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 78-29, § 2, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 94-7, 9-15-94; Ord. No.06-15, § 2, 10-19-2006; Ord. No. 08-16, § 3C., 9-18-2008) 
ARTICLE 13. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— See editor's footnote to Art. 9 title. 

Section 13.1. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by other statutes, such as requiring wider side yards or greater percentages of unoccupied lot area, then the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 13.2. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 13.3. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
Section 13.4. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
Adopted by the Mayor and Council [Board of Aldermen] of the City of Dublin, this 25th day of August, 1969. 
_____ Lena Opie, City Clerk 
Approved by the Mayor of the City of Dublin, this _______ day of _______, 1968. 
_____ William R. Smith, Mayor 
(Ord. No. 79-22, § 1, 8-6-79) 
ARTICLE 14. - SOLAR INSTALLATIONS 

Section 14.1. - In general; all solar systems. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Solar collection system means a solar energy system that transforms solar energy into another form of energy or transfers heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means. 
(2)  Small scale solar collection system means a solar collection system that transforms solar energy into another form of energy or transfers heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means, principally for use on the same property. 
(3)  Solar farm means a solar collection system placed in an area for the purpose of generating photovoltaic electric power principally for use off-site, or where the solar collection system is the primary land use on the parcel where it is located, or where the total area of a ground based or free standing solar collection system occupies more than one (1) acre. This is also referred to as a "solar park," "solar power plant" or "solar photovoltaic farm." 
(b)  Solar collectors shall not emit unreasonable glare. Exterior surfaces of the collectors and related equipment shall have a non-reflective finish. Solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto the habitable portion of adjacent buildings or properties, or onto roadways, in such manner as to cause a nuisance, impair the vision of a driver of any motor vehicle, or be detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  Requirements for labeling and signage, installation, structural certification, roof covering must comply with applicable building codes. 
(d)  All systems must be clearly marked, including the: 
(1)  Main service disconnect; 
(2)  All conduit, raceways, enclosures, cable assemblies and junction boxes to alert the fire service to avoid cutting them, every ten (10) feet, at turns and at penetrations, and at all combiner and junction boxes. 
(e)  To insure emergency personnel access, in particular for fire departments, roof mounted systems shall provide access and spacing requirements in order to: 
(1)  Insure roof access and egress. 
(2)  Provide pathways throughout the roof area. 
(3)  Provide smoke ventilation opportunity are areas. 
(f)  No permit shall be issued without proof that any electrical utility with power to the property has been informed of applicant's intent to install a solar collection system. 
(g)  Solar installations in any historic district shall require a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to the City of Dublin Historic District Ordinance. 
(h)  Solar Easements—Property owners installing any solar energy collection system shall be responsible for negotiating with surrounding property owners any desired solar easement, and for properly recording and enforcing same. 
(i)  A ten (10) foot area clear of trees, bushes or brush is required surrounding all ground mounted photovoltaic arrays. Vegetation in the area must be kept trimmed to less than eighteen (18) inches. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Section 14.2. - Small scale solar collection systems. 
Small scale solar collection systems shall be considered an accessory use in all zoning districts in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Freestanding solar panels: 
1.  Shall only be permitted as an accessory use on the lot of a principal structure. 
2.  Shall only be permitted in the rear and side yard the lot of a principal structure, or on the roof of conforming structures. 
3.  When located on the ground or attached to a framework located on the ground shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the ground. 
4.  Shall conform to all set back requirements as for other uses in the districts in which they are located. 
5.  The total coverage of a lot with freestanding solar panels cannot exceed fifty percent (50%) lot coverage or the maximum allowable coverage for the district in which they are located, whichever is less. 
6.  Small solar panel systems not connected to the electrical system of the structures on the property or to the electrical grid in any way, such as solar security or decorative yard lights, and where the solar panel area measures less than two (2) square feet, are exempt from permitting. 
(b)  Roof-mounted solar panels: 
1.  Shall not project vertically more than the height requirements for the district in which they are located. 
2.  Where visible from the ground, shall be color-coordinated to harmonize with roof materials and other dominant colors of the structure. 
3.  Owner shall provide proof of notification to the managing authority of any airport located within five (5) miles of the proposed location where the size of the installation exceeds one (1) acre. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Section 14.3. - Solar farms. 
Solar farms shall be permitted only in the M-2 District, in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Solar farms shall be enclosed by perimeter fencing to restrict unauthorized access at a minimum height of six (6) feet, which shall be maintained in good condition, and any gates shall be securely locked. 
(b)  The manufacturers' or installers' identification and appropriate warning signage shall be posted at the site in a clearly visible manner. At least one sign shall be posted at the entrance to the facility showing the owner's name, address and emergency contact information. 
(c)  On-site power lines shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground. 
(d)  Solar farms shall adhere to the requirements of the district in which they are located, including but not limited to setbacks, height, lot area coverage requirements and buffer requirements. 
(1)  Where a solar farm is located on a major street, solar plant structures must be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way. 
(2)  A solar farm with solar panels within one hundred (100) feet of any street must have sufficient barriers to prevent a passenger vehicle leaving that street at the maximum speed limit from entering the solar field. A "passenger vehicle" means every motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. 
(e)  The following requirements shall be met for permit applications: 
(1)  A descriptive plot plan including setbacks, panel sizes, locations of property lines, buildings, and road right-of-ways. 
(2)  The plan shall include a fire suppression system sufficient to prevent a fire from spreading off the site. 
(3)  No solar farm shall be installed until evidence has been given to the city that the electric utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  An affidavit or evidence of agreement between lot owner and the facility's owner or operator confirming that the owner or operator has permission of the property owner to apply for necessary permits for construction and operation of the urban solar farm. 
(5)  Proof of notification to the managing authority of any airport located within five (5) miles of the proposed location. 
(6)  Any other relevant studies, reports, certificates and approvals as may be reasonably requested by the City of Dublin, including but not limited to design review. 
(f)  The following requirements shall be met for decommissioning solar farms: 
(1)  Each applicant for a permit must submit decommissioning plans that describe the anticipated life of the solar project, the party responsible for decommissioning, the estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars, and the method for ensuring by bond that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration. 
(2)  Preferred bond instruments shall include cash or surety from a bonding company with authority to operate in the State of Georgia and approved by the city. The bond shall consist of three components for purposes of determining its amount. The first component will address environmental liabilities including hazardous materials liabilities, such as risks associated with hazardous waste and hazardous substances. The second component will address the decommissioning, removal, and proper disposal, as appropriate, of improvements and facilities. The third component will address reclamation, re-vegetation, restoration, and soil stabilization. There shall be a single instrument to cover all potential liabilities. The entire bond amount may be used to address a single risk event such as hazardous materials release or groundwater contamination regardless of the fact that in calculating the total bond amount other risks were also considered. If the bond is used to address a particular risk, the holder would then be required to increase the bond amount to compensate for this use. 
(3)  Solar farms which have not been in active and continuous service for a period of one (1) year shall be removed at the owners or operators expense. 
(4)  The site shall be restored to as natural condition as possible within six (6) months of the removal. 
(5)  A site will be considered decommissioned when, after inspection and approval by the city, all structures and equipment are removed and the site is re-vegetated. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN THE CITY OF DUBLIN, GEORGIA. 
ORDINANCE NO. 81-12 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW SET OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF DUBLIN, GEORGIA: AND PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH ORDINANCE AND A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, 
BE IT ORDAINED BY the Mayor and Council of Dublin, Georgia that: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-12, § 1, adopted May 14, 1981, amended the Code by deleting former App. B, which contained the subdivision regulations, as amended by Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, adopted July 17, 1980, which consisted of Arts. 1—12 and Paving Specifications, derived from Ord. No. 71-5, adopted Feb. 15, 1971. Ord. No. 81-12, § 1, enacted a new App. B pertaining to similar subject matter. The absence of a history note following a section indicates that the section is derived unchanged from Ord. No. 81-12; conversely, a history note following a section indicates amendment of that section by the ordinances cited therein. 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 6; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; planning and zoning, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 24; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSES, OBJECTIVES AND INTENT 
Many investments are affected when new homes are built, therefore, reasonable control and management of land development is necessary in order to protect these investments. 
The first investment to consider is that of the subdivision owner or developer. These regulations require the developer to meet certain standards in designing his subdivision that will provide him with desirable, saleable lots. This, in turn, will give his investors a certain guarantee of economic return. 
A careful planned development can instill a certain neighborhood pride even before the first individual homeowners move in. The second investor, the homeowner, is protected by ensuring the installation of proper facilities and recreational areas. Further, if the natural beauty is retained and protective covenants are established on the development, the homeowner's property value should increase rather than decline as has been the case in too many neighborhoods in the past. 
Probably the greatest error in the past has been the lack of recognition of the long term responsibilities involved in subdividing land. This error has proven to be costly and affects a third investor, the Dublin city government. Representing the taxpayer and his family, the Dublin city government intends to protect his interest and other interests involved by the adoption and enforcement of these regulations. 
The intent of these regulations is to provide for the harmonious development of the city and to ensure coordinated growth with adequate provision for traffic, recreation, drainage, sewerage and other factors which affect higher density development. This control is necessary to ensure the maximum return on the private and public investment, and at the same time to ensure the homeowner's protection and the subdivider full consideration of his investment and responsibility. 
ARTICLE 2. - AUTHORITY 
The Dublin subdivision regulations are adopted under authority granted by the General Planning Enabling Legislation of the State of Georgia, 1957, as amended, (Georgia Code Annotated, Section 69-12 et seq.) The Dublin Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority. 
No subdivider shall sell or negotiate to sell any lot in a proposed subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, until such plat has been given final approval by the Dublin Planning Commission, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the Superior Court of Laurens County. 
ARTICLE 3. - JURISDICTION, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 
These regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of Dublin, Georgia, and shall govern all undeveloped units of existing subdivisions. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor for any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE 4. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Should any section provisions of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict hereby are repealed. 
ARTICLE 5. - DEFINITIONS 
Except as otherwise specified herein, all words used herein shall have their customary dictionary definition. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. 
Alley: A narrow service way dedicated for public use providing a secondary public means of access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Building setback line: A line on the plat generally parallel to the street right-of-way line, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
Comprehensive development plan: The various maps, charts, and descriptive and explanatory material and all textual matter approved by the Dublin Planning Commission and city council to guide and shape the growth of Dublin. 
Development: The act of building structures and/or installing site improvements. 
Easement: A grant by property owners of the use for a specific purpose (or purposes) of a piece of land by the general public, a corporation, or a person or persons. 
Lot or plat: Portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
Lot depth: The distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Lot frontage: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. On corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
(a)  Corner lot means a lot at the intersection of at least two (2) streets. 
(b)  Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot, which has front on only one street. 
(c)  Through lot means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the front of the building. 
Planning commission: The Dublin Planning Commission, as established by the city government in accordance with Georgia General Act. No. 358, 1957, as amended. 
Public way: A piece of land over which the general public has a right of usage whether acquired through prescription, by adverse use of the general public, or otherwise. 
Street: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. This includes avenues, roads, lanes, drives, or other means of ingress or egress regardless of the terms used to designate them. The subdivider shall be concerned with the following types of street development: 
(a)  Local service street is one which is intended to provide direct access to abutting property. 
(b)  Marginal access street is generally parallel and adjacent to controlled access thoroughfares, arterials or connector streets, for the purposes of providing access to abutting properties and of separating high speed from local traffic. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac is a service street having one end open to traffic, with the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround. 
Subdivider: A person, firm, corporation or association undertaking the process of subdivision on a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership [or] building development whether immediate or future. 
Subdivision: Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land, regardless of its prospective use. Said subdivision may be accomplished by platting or a description by metes and bounds or otherwise, into two (2) or more lots or other division for sale or improvement. The term "subdivision" as used herein shall mean the act of subdivision and shall not be construed in a literal or restricted sense. However, where appropriate to the context the term "subdivision" shall mean the aggregate of all parcels held by one owner or combination of owners and designated to be developed or sold as parcels related to each other or interdependent through the use of streets, easements or other right-of-way or public facility. The following properties, however, shall not, for the purpose of this ordinance, be deemed subdivisions: 
(a)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are in accord with the zoning ordinance as amended. 
(b)  Division of land into parcels having five (5) or more acres where no new street or roadway is involved. 
(c)  Division of land into two (2) or fewer lots, provided: 
(1)  Each lot abuts an existing public street, and is in accord with these regulations and with the zoning ordinance as amended. 
(2)  No alteration of existing utility installation is involved. 
(3)  That the planning commission is notified of such division of land through a plat and executes a formal release of the property for recording and development purposes. 
ARTICLE 6. - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL 

Section 6.1. - General application. 
Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit to the Dublin Planning Commission plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all the requirements set forth in these regulations: 
Section 6.1.1. Preliminary plat approval required prior to clearing and grading streets. No clearing or grading of proposed streets shall begin prior to approval of the preliminary plat by the Dublin Planning Commission as certified thereon. This prohibition shall extend to any other improvement related to the development of the proposed subdivision. 
Section 6.1.2. Development plans approval required prior to construction of improvements. No required subdivision improvement contained herein shall commence prior to the approval of development plans by the planning commission, except that clearing and grading of streets may commence after preliminary plat approval. 
Section 6.1.3. Recording of final plat required prior to sale of lot. No subdivider shall sell or negotiate to sell any lot in the proposed subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use of plat of such subdivision until such plat has been given final approval by the planning commission, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Laurens County. 
Section 6.1.4. Subdivision of "as built" plans prior to final acceptance by governing body. Final acceptance of any subdivision improvements which vary substantially from the approved development plans shall not be given by the city prior to the submission and approval of "as built" plans and any other technical information which may be required. 
Section 6.1.5. Legal status of public street required. No land dedicated as a public street shall be accepted, opened, or improved, nor shall any utilities or other facilities be installed therein unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat approved by the planning commission. Streets which shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received legal status of a public street, prior to the adoption of these regulations may be improved, or utilities or other facilities may be installed therein. The city council, however, may locate and construct or may accept any other street if the ordinance or other measure for such approval is first submitted to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
Section 6.1.6. Access to public street required. No building permit shall be issued and no building or other structures shall be erected on any lot unless such lot has access to a street which shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of a public street; provided, however, that private streets and other private accessways may be approved under the terms of these regulations in PUD developments, condominium projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers, apartment projects or other developments. 
Section 6.2. - Discretionary preapplication review. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the planning commission is proposed, the subdivider may, at his discretion, consult early and informally with the city's engineer for advice and assistance. However, in no instance shall the discretionary preapplication review be made or accepted in lieu of the required plats and specifications contained herein. 
Section 6.3. - Procedure of preliminary plat approval. 
Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvements or the installation of utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission, and receive approval of, a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
Section 6.3.1. Application for preliminary plat approval. Following discretionary preapplication review, if any, the subdivider shall submit formal application for preliminary plat approval. The application shall be received not less than thirty (30) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted along with any other documents required in Section 6.4. 
Section 6.3.2. Review of preliminary plat. The city engineer and the designated platting officer shall check the plat for conformance to the regulations set forth in this document and ensure that the findings of the reviewing department are noted and forwarded to the planning commission. In such instances where public sewer and/or public water is not available, the review of the health department, along with any conditions or modifications required by that agency, shall be on file prior to preliminary plat approval. 
Section 6.3.3. Hearing on preliminary plat. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on the preliminary plat at the first regular meeting following the review of the various departments. 
Section 6.3.4. Preliminary plat approval. Following the preliminary plat hearing, the planning commission shall: 
(a)  Issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval; or 
(b)  Issue a certificate of conditional preliminary plat approval; the conditions shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or attached in writing; or 
(c)  Disapprove the preliminary plat or any portion, in which case the planning commission shall notify the subdivider in writing, with a statement on the reasons for disapproval. 
Section 6.3.5. Action of the planning commission. The planning commission's decision shall be noted on four (4) copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the county health department, one copy to the city's engineer and one copy being added to the records of the planning commission. Approval of preliminary plat does not constitute approval of any required improvements, development plans, or a final plat. It indicated only approval of the subdivision layout and no work may proceed beyond the clearing and grading of lots and proposed streets. 
Section 6.3.6. Expiration time. Preliminary plat approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months from the dates of the preliminary plat approval unless the time is extended by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-21, § 1, 11-2-2006) 
Section 6.4. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
Section 6.4.1. Preparation and specifications. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered Georgia land surveyor and all of the following specifications shall be shown. No plat shall be filed or accepted for review which does not meet the minimum specifications contained in these regulations and in the Georgia State Plat Act, as amended. 
Section 6.4.2. Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to one inch. The plat shall have a closure precision of one foot in five thousand (5,000) feet. 
Section 6.4.3. Sheet size. The preliminary plat shall be drawn in ink on suitable permanent reproducible material, on sheets seventeen (17) by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown in sections of more than one sheet with an index map drawn at a reduced scale. 
Section 6.4.4. Ground elevations. The preliminary plat may show ground elevation based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. At least one bench mark shall be tied to the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
Section 6.4.5. Existing conditions to be provided on preliminary plat. 
(a)  Title ("Preliminary"), numerical scale; north arrow, indicating both magnetic and true north; date; inscription stating "Not For Final Recording." 
(b)  A vicinity map showing the location of the tract with approximate distance to obvious geographical locations. 
(c)  Present tract designation according to official records, title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners of the property to be subdivided, name and address of subdivision designer, notation stating acreage to be subdivided, bench marks, certification of registered Georgia land surveyor, and date of survey. 
(d)  Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions with deed plat book referenced. 
(e)  Other conditions on adjacent land character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences within one hundred (100) feet. 
(f)  Boundary lines, bearing and distances of perimeter boundaries. 
(g)  Existing easements; location, width, and purpose. 
(h)  Contour lines on sea level data. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than five (5) feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
(i)  Existing streets on, abutting, and adjacent to the tract; name, right-of-way width, roadway width. 
(j)  Utilities on, abutting, and adjacent to the tract; location, size, and invert elevation of existing sanitary and storm sewer; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, and electric and telephone lines. 
(k)  Other conditions on the tract; wooded areas, tree masses, major rock outcroppings, houses, barns, shacks, all watercourses, marshes, swamps, and land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding, and other significant features. 
(l)  In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed changes superimposed thereon. 
Section 6.4.6. Proposed conditions to be provided on preliminary plat. 
(a)  Layout of streets showing right-of-way width and roadway widths. 
(b)  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines with letter designations for proposed street names, sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public uses, for nonpublic or community uses exclusive of single-family dwellings, for nonresidential uses, and for multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  Designation of land to be reserved or dedicated for public use, together with their purposes and limitations or conditions of such reservations or dedications, if any. 
(d)  Sites, if any, for multiple family dwellings if located within the proposed subdivision, or adjacent to, or abutting thoroughfare needed as a result of the proposed subdivision. 
Section 6.4.7. Certificate of preliminary approval. A certificate of preliminary approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that all the requirements of the Preliminary Plat have been fulfilled (and with consideration to any conditions noted below), this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the City of Dublin Planning Commission on _______, 19_______. The Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the Development Plans or the Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval shall expire in twelve (12) months and be null and void on _______, 19_______. 
_____ Date 
_____ Chairperson, City of Dublin Planning Commission" 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" 
Section 6.4.8. Installation of site improvements. After receiving a certificate of preliminary approval by the commission, the subdivider is limited to clearing and grading the streets and lots. 
Section 6.5. - Procedure for development plan approval. 
Prior to the installation of any required improvements or utilities, other than the clearing or grading of streets and lots, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission and receive approval of development plans in accordance with the following procedures: 
Section 6.5.1. Application for development plan approval. Application for development plan approval may be concurrent with preliminary plat approval or subsequently as a separate review. In either instance the application shall be received not less than thirty (30) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. Two (2) copies of the development plans shall be submitted along with any other documents required in Section 6.6. 
Section 6.5.2. Review of development plans. The city engineer and other city and county officials he deems necessary, shall review the development plans for conformance to the regulations set forth in this document and ensure that the findings of the reviewing departments are noted and forwarded to the planning commission. 
Section 6.5.3. Hearing on development plans. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on the development plans at its next regular meeting following the review of the various departments. The hearing for the approval of the development plans may be held concurrently with or separate from the review of the preliminary plat. 
Section 6.5.4. Development plan approval. Following the hearing on the development plans and other related materials, the planning commission shall: 
(1)  Issue a certificate of development plan approval, noting the conditions of such approval on the plans or attached in writing; or 
(2)  Disapprove the development plans or any portion, in which case, the planning commission shall notify the subdivider in writing with a statement on the reasons for disapproval. 
Approval of the development plan does not constitute approval of the final plat. It authorizes that work may begin on the construction and installation of all improvements for the proposed layout shown on the preliminary plat and subject to the inspection by the city engineer. 
Section 6.5.5. Action of the planning commission. The planning commission's decision shall be noted on two (2) copies of the development plan with one copy being returned to the subdivider, and one being added to the records of the planning commission. 
Section 6.5.6. Expiration time. Development plan approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months from the date of approval unless the time is extended by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-21, § 2, 11-2-2006) 
Section 6.6. - Development plan specifications. 
Section 6.6.1. Preparation and specifications. The development plans shall be drawn according to the preliminary plat specifications prescribed in Sections 6.4.1 through 6.4.3. 
Section 6.6.2. Proposed conditions to be provided on development plans. 
(a)  Plans of any sanitary sewer with service grades, pipe sizes, and points of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations, and sufficient dimensions to locate same on ground. 
(b)  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures, including catch basins, grates, headwalls, and any extensions. 
(c)  Acreage of drainage area are [or] constant used in determining the size of the structures by a formula approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Location of land subject to flooding, indicated by flood crescent contour, as provided by city, county or other source. 
(e)  Plans for storm drainage system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet, together with certified copy of all drainage areas, design factors, and computations. 
(f)  Plans for water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all appurtenances. 
(g)  Existing and finished grades including the clear identification of areas in which substantial grade changes and filling will occur. 
(h)  Engineering data as listed below: 
(1)  Three-line profile of proposed streets, showing center line elevations along right-of-way lines on either side of street, exposed rock to be indicated, drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section, showing street layout, width, curvature and drainage required. 
(2)  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed the grade, size of pipe, location of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(3)  Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include elevations at fifty-foot intervals for a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet back to the beginning point and forward to the ending point or such additional distance as may be required by the city engineer. 
(4)  All elevations shall be coordinated and tied to the U.S.G.S. bench marks, where feasible. 
(5)  The above submittals shall be drawn to a scale no less than as follows: 
Horizontal scale       1:100 feet 
Vertical scale       1:10 feet 
(i)  Where a proposed road abuts the plat boundary, a properly executed slope easement shall be submitted. A slope easement shall be also submitted under such conditions as may be required by the city engineer. 
Section 6.6.3. Certificate of development plan approval. A certificate of approval of the development plans by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plans as follows: 
"In that all the requirements of Development Plans have been fulfilled (and with consideration to any conditions noted below), this subdivision plan was given approval by the City of Dublin Planning Commission on _______, 19_______. This approval does not constitute approval of the Final Plat or acceptance of improvements. This Certificate of Approval shall expire in twelve (12) months and be null and void on _______, 19_______. 
_____ Date 
_____ Chairperson, City of Dublin Planning Commission" 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" 
Section 6.6.4. Installation of site improvements. After receiving a certificate of approval for the development plans by the planning commission, the subdivider may then provide to install [for installation of] any and all improvements required under these regulations and any other applicable regulations of the city. In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall post a performance bond or cashier's check approved by the city in accordance with section 6.9. In addition to the subdivider's estimate of improvement costs, it shall be necessary for the city engineer to solicit a cost estimate for same from a bondable contractor. It shall also be necessary that final estimate of improvement cost be mutually agreed upon by the city engineer, the planning commission, and the subdivider. 
Section 6.7. - Final plat procedure. 
After completion of physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a performance bond guaranteeing any unfinished or any unacceptable portion of the same, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission a final plat in accordance with the following procedures: 
Section 6.7.1. Application for final plat approval. Within twelve (12) months or (within such additional time as may be granted by the planning commission) after approval of the development plans, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission a formal application for final plat approval. Four (4) copies of the final plat shall be submitted along with any other documents in Section 6.8. 
Section 6.7.2. Review of the final plat. The final plat shall be reviewed for conformance with the approved preliminary plat, the approved development plans, the requirements of those regulations, and any special conditions or restrictions imposed by the planning commission. 
Section 6.7.3. Hearing on the final plat. The planning commission shall provide a hearing of the final plat at the first regular meeting of the planning commission following submission of the final plat. The city engineer shall present at the planning commission hearing on the final plat, his written findings and recommendations. 
Section 6.7.4. Planning commission approval. The planning commission may give final approval provided the final plat and approved development plans and that all conditions specified by the planning commission and specified herein have been met; and shall sign a certificate of approval of all plats. Recording of the final plat shall be done in accordance with Section 6.9. 
Section 6.8. - Final plat specifications. 
Section 6.8.1. Conformance with the preliminary plat and development plans. The final plat shall conform to the conditions of the approved preliminary plat and development plans. 
Section 6.8.2. Original tracing specifications. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be one hundred (100) feet to one inch on a sheet seventeen (17) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of such size, it may be shown as written in sections on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. The final plat shall be in compliance with the Georgia State Plat Act, as amended. 
Section 6.8.3. Additional specifications. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Primary control points with necessary descriptions and locations of such angles, bearings and similar data necessary for locating on ground. 
(b)  Tract boundary lines and property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to produce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, setback line whether curved or straight. This shall include but not be limited to the radius; length of arc; internal angles, and bearings of the tangents and tangent distances for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary or curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute. 
(c)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
(d)  Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easement. 
(e)  Number of letter of identity of each lot and block. 
(f)  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
(g)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
(h)  Location and description of monuments and markers. 
(i)  Reference to recorded plats of adjoining land by record and name. 
(j)  Title, numerical scale, north arrow, and date. 
(k)  A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: "This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated _______, which hereby become a part of this plat," recorded on _______ and signed by the owner. 
(l)  Notation of the necessary certification shall be placed on the final plat as specified below in Sections 6.8.4 through 6.8.8 as applicable. 
Section 6.8.4. Surveyor's certification. A signed certification by a registered Georgia land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"In my opinion this plat is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law and has been calculated for closures by latitudes and departments and is found to be accurate within foot in five thousand (5,000) feet. 
BY: _____ 
Registered Georgia Professional Land Surveyor No.: _____ 
Date: _______" 
Section 6.8.5. Owner's certification. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification;  State of Georgia, County of Laurens 
The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges that plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicated to public use forever all shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements or parks. 
_____
_____ Owner's Name" 
Section 6.8.6. Reserved. 
Section 6.8.7. Certificate of approval by the city engineer. A signed certification of the city engineer shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that the owner, or his agent, has completed the construction and installation of the street drainage, utilities, and other improvements in accordance with the regulations of the City of Dublin, Georgia; or has posted a performance bond or cashier's check in lieu thereof. 
_____ Date 
_____ City Engineer" 
Section 6.8.8. Certificate of final approval by the commission. Certification of final plat approval by the planning commission shall be made only after every item of these regulations has been complied with and shall state the following: 
"I certify that all the requirements for Final Approval of this Plat have been fulfilled in accordance with the regulations of the City of Dublin, Georgia, and the requirements of the Dublin Planning Commission. 
Name  _____ Chairperson,  Dublin Planning Commission 
Date: _____ 
Section 6.8.9. City council acceptance of public streets. Once approved by the planning commission, the final plat and other supplementary material required shall be transmitted to the city council for final action. The approval of the final plat by the city council shall deem acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown on the final plat on behalf of the public. 
Section 6.8.10. Certification of improvements prior to acceptance by the governing body. The planning commission and the city engineer shall not recommend that any subdivision improvements be accepted for maintenance by the city unless they have been installed in accordance with approved development plans or approved "as built" plans and other technical information which may be required. 
Section 6.9. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon the approval of the final plat by the city council, the owner or his agent shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court for the sale of any lot in the subdivision. 
Upon recording of the approved final plat the original tracing or other permanent material, a reproducible print of the final plat at the original scale, with all certificates endorsed, shall be provided by the subdivider and shall be returned to the city for its files. 
Section 6.9.1. Approval. Approval of the final plat shall be effective and binding upon the planning commission and the City of Dublin, Georgia, for a period not to exceed five (5) years from final approval and recording of said plat and thereafter said approval shall expire and be null and void except to the extent that work on the subdivision has progressed, unless a request for an extension of time has been submitted to and is subsequently approved by the planning commission. This provision shall apply to all subdivision approvals including past, present, or future subdivisions. 
In the event past, present, or future subdivisions are not completed within five (5) years from the final approval and recording of the final subdivision plat and no extension has been granted and approved by the planning commission, plans must be renewed under the subdivision ordinance in existence at the time of request for renewal. 
Section 6.9.2. Requirement for "as built" plans and other technical information. Upon completion of the installation of the improvements required by these rules and regulations, the subdivider shall present to the city engineer one complete set of the construction plans and drawings showing the subdivision and its improvements. This set of plans and drawings shall include: 
(a)  "As built" plans of all streets and alleys showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines. 
(b)  "As built" centerline profiles of all streets. 
(c)  Profiles and inverted elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines as such improvements shall have actually been installed by the subdivider. 
(d)  A letter submitted by a registered surveyor certifying that all sewers, storm drains, curbing and paving, have been placed according to grade stakes set by him or his representatives to conform with construction plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
ARTICLE 7. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 

Section 7.1. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage and erosion, as determined by the city engineer and any land deemed by the planning commission to be unsuitable for development shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
Section 7.2. - Access. 
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. No subdivision shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
Section 7.3. - Conformance to comprehensive development plan. 
All subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive development plan, zoning and subdivision regulations, and development policies of the City of Dublin in effect at the time of submission to the planning commission. 
Section 7.3.1. Where features of the comprehensive development plan such as school sites, parks, arterial streets, and other public spaces are located in a subdivision, or when features have not been anticipated by planning policy, but are considered essential by the planning commission, such features shall be dedicated or in lieu of dedication be reserved by the subdivider. Whenever such reserved land, or any portion, is not acquired, optioned, [or] condemned by the appropriate public agency within a one-year period from the date of recording the subdivision, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider according to the subdivision regulations. 
Section 7.3.2. The planning commission may waive the abovementioned platting and reservation requirements, whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such planned feature is not being acquired. 
Section 7.3.3. Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land for public use and the planning commission or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not suitable for public use the planning commission may either refuse to approve the plat or it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
Section 7.4. - Zoning and other regulations. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between the minimum standards and dimensions noted within these regulations and those contained in other regulations of the city, the more restrictive shall apply. 
Section 7.5. - Planned unit development. 
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a planned unit development which is not divided into the customary lots, blocks and streets which, in the judgment of the planning commission provided adequate public spaces and improvement for the general well-being of the residents, provided zoning density standards are not exceeded, and which also provided such covenants and other legal procedures as will ensure achievement of the plan. Plans for such development shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission whether or not such plat is to be recorded and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
Section 7.5.1. No plans for a planned unit development (PUD) shall be reviewed or approved by the planning commission before the developer's site has been zoned to allow for such use. 
Section 7.6. - Modification of subdivision principles and standards of design. 
Section 7.6.1. Modifications of these regulations may be made where the subdivision shows that a provision of the regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and/or where because of topography and other conditions particular to the site, and/or where, in the opinion of the planning commission, a modification may be made without otherwise nullifying the standard design specifications of the city and intent of these regulations or the Dublin Zoning Ordinance. Any modification thus authorized shall be noted on the final plat before approval of the plat. 
Section 7.6.2. Modifications of these regulations will be considered in order to ensure that the City remains competitive with other development markets. Innovative proposals which may not comply with the Subdivision Principals And Standards of Design will be considered in order to allow developers the flexibility of meeting consumer demands. Each proposal which deviates from the Subdivision Principals And Standards in this Ordinance, will be evaluated on its own merit; and, consideration will be based on the overall benefit to the citizens of Dublin. 
Section 7.6.3. Proposals which deviate from Subdivision Principals And Standards of Design must be submitted in writing to the City Engineer's office, with the necessary supporting documents, including the justification for the portions of the proposal which deviate from standards written in the Ordinance. After review of the proposal, the City Engineer will submit a written response to the developer. In accordance with established procedure, the Planning And Zoning Board will hold a hearing on the development plans. The Board's acceptance of proposals, which deviate from the Subdivision Principals And Standards Of Design in this Ordinance, will be based on the City Engineer's recommendation of the proposal's overall benefit. Proposals which necessitate City of Dublin capital expenditures, must also be approved by the City Council. 
ARTICLE 8. - REQUIRED DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 8.1. - Required design standards. 
The design standards set forth in this article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the planning commission, except that standards for street improvements shall be applicable only to those plats for which street improvements are required as a condition of plat approval. 
Section 8.2. - Streets. 
Section 8.2.1. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width but in no case less than the required width. 
Section 8.2.2. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than two hundred (200) feet shall not be permitted. 
Section 8.2.3. Except where topography or other conditions make it impractical, culs-de-sac or the dead-end streets shall not be greater than six hundred (600) feet in length. They shall be provided with a turnaround having a forty-foot radius to face a curb and a right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
Section 8.2.4. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall not be permitted. 
Section 8.2.5. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for parks in residential districts, or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
Section 8.2.6. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and no intersection shall be at an angle less than sixty (60) degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required. 
Section 8.2.7. Curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least fifteen (15) feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees, the planning commission may require a greater radius. 
Section 8.2.8. Right-of-way radius at street intersections shall parallel the curbline radius. 
Section 8.2.9. Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots to be used for multiple-family, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys or service drives. 
Section 8.2.10. Half-streets shall be prohibited. 
Section 8.2.11. Easements shall be required having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and located along the side and rear lot lines for utility. These easements shall, through deed covenants, be maintained clear of dense shrubbery, trees or fences. 
Section 8.3. - Street rights-of-way and paving widths. 
Section 8.3.1. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(a)  Marginal access street ..... 50 feet 
(b)  Local service street, curb and guttering ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Cul-de-sac ..... 50 feet 
(d)  Cul-de-sac (diameter) ..... 100 feet 
(e)  Alleys, service drives or private drives ..... 30 feet 
(f)  Streets of greater traffic capacity shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Highway Department. 
Section 8.3.2. Street paving widths shall be no less than as follows: 
(a)  Marginal access streets ..... 28 feet 
(b)  Local service streets with curb and guttering ..... 28 feet 
(c)  Cul-de-sac streets ..... 28 feet 
(d)  Cul-de-sac turnarounds: 
(1)  Residential, outside pavement radius ..... 40 feet 
Residential, inside pavement radius ..... 20 feet 
(2)  Commercial and industrial, outside pavement radius ..... 60 feet 
Inside pavement radius ..... 30 feet 
(e)  Alleys, service drives or private drives ..... 20 feet 
(f)  (See Section 8.3.1 above). 
Section 8.3.3. Maximum and minimum grades for all streets shall not be in excess of fourteen (14) percent and not less than four-tenths (.4) percent. 
Section 8.3.4. Maximum radii of center line curvature for all residential streets shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
Section 8.4. - Block and lot design. 
Section 8.4.1. Block length and widths. 
(a)  Blocks shall be not greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet, measured along the center line of the block. When a block exceeds six hundred (600) feet in length the planning commission may require a fifteen-foot easement for a crosswalk through the block. If provided the crosswalk shall be four (4) feet paved walk. 
(b)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major thoroughfares, limited access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
Section 8.4.2. Lot size, shape and arrangement. 
(a)  The size, shape and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the planning commission for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than six (6) times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Every residential lot shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements of the zoning ordinance, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the health department. 
(c)  Double frontage, unless required by the planning commission, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation and property size. A planting screen reservation of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(d)  Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(e)  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, shall be such that lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the center line of the lake. Such requirement may be waived upon submittal to the planning commission of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. 
ARTICLE 9. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Every subdivider at his own expense shall be required to install or at his own expense have installed by the appropriate public utility the following utilities: 

Section 9.1. - Monuments. 
Right-of-way and property line monuments shall be placed in each subdivision in accordance with the following: 
Section 9.1.1. Right-of-way monuments. Reinforced concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or square, thirty (30) inches long, and a flat top, shall be set at street corners, at points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in a street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location, and shall be extended no less than six (6) inches above the finished grade. 
Section 9.1.2. Property line monuments. An iron pin imbedded at least two (2) feet into the ground shall be required at each lot corner and each point where the property line changes direction. Such iron pin shall be at least one-half (½) inch in diameter and shall extend no less than one inch above the finished grade. 
Section 9.2. - Street grading. 
All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to provide the necessary paving, roadway, drainage, and safety requirements. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction cuts and fills shall be in accordance with the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.3. - Storm drainage. 
An adequate system based upon at least a ten-year storm frequency shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water originating in or affecting the subdivision. The subdivider shall also provide adequate drainage for springs and other groundwater drainage. The drainage system shall conform to Standard Design Specifications of the City; and shall include necessary curbing, pipes, culverts, headwall, drop inlets, bridge ditches, or any other type of drainage facility needed to control the flow of water in, around, or through the subdivision. 
Section 9.4. - Installation of utilities. 
After grading is completed and approved before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities, water mains, sewer mains, and all service connections related thereto shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the street, according to the Standard Design Specifications of the City. All driveways for houses to be built by the subdivider shall be cut and drained. Where the utility mains are off the pavements, the subdivider may elect to omit the installation of service connections, providing that such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. 
Section 9.5. - Slopes and shoulder improvements. 
The minimum ratio for all filled or cut slopes (including drainage ditches) shall be three to one and the minimum width for all shoulders from the back edge of the curb, if installed, shall be nine (9) feet. All shoulders shall slope one-half (½) inch to the foot. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
Section 9.6. - Street paving. 
Street base and paving shall be installed according to the Standard Design Specifications of the City. Street paving widths shall be in conformance with standards set forth in Section 8.3.2. 
Section 9.7. - Curb and guttering. 
Curb and guttering shall be installed on all streets according to the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.8. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be provided in subdivisions located within one mile from an existing or proposed school. Sidewalks shall have the minimum width of four (4) feet in paving and shall meet the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.9. - Water supply. 
The waterlines shall be installed in conformance with the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.10. - Sanitary sewer. 
All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.11. - Gas. 
When gas mains are connected with the gas distribution system, the lines shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plats. The gas lines shall be constructed in conformance with the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
Section 9.12. - Fire hydrants. 
Standard fire hydrants as specified by the Standard Design Specifications shall be installed as a part of the water distribution system. Fire hydrants shall be located at all entrances to subdivision developments (both residential and commercial), at every street intersection inside the subdivision, and at any other locations required, so that no distance between fire hydrants exceeds five hundred (500) feet. 
Fire hydrants shall be installed so that there is a minimum of eighteen (18) inches and a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches of clearance from the bottom of the steamer (4½") outlet to the finished grade when the final grading is completed. The steamer (4½") outlet shall be turned toward the street. 
Fire hydrants shall be placed so that no other above ground utility (gas meters or sub-station, power poles or transformer boxes, telephone or cable junction boxes, or fence) is within five (5) feet. The planting of flowers and shrubbery shall take into consideration the mature growth size and not be planted with five (5) feet and kept maintained (trimmed or manicured) so that the foliage will not encroach on this five-foot area and hinder the fire department with locating fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 93-15, 12-9-93) 
Section 9.13. - Street lighting. 
The general standard of residential street lighting for the city is as follows: 
(a)  Underground electrical distribution. For the provisions of street lighting at intersections, dead ends or courts, luminaries are to be mounted on twenty-five-foot bronze fiber-glass poles and of an approved type eight thousand five hundred-fifty (8,550) lumen HPS unit, unless otherwise specified by the City. Maximum spacing shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet for straight streets; and for curved streets, irregular contours and intersections, this spacing shall be altered as conditions indicate so as to provide adequate lighting. 
(b)  Aboveground electrical distribution. For the provisions of street lighting at intersections, dead ends or courts, luminaries are to be mounted where practical on electrical distribution poles and shall be provided by the city. Spacing shall be determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, 3-3-88) 
Section 9.14. - Administrative procedures. 
The administrative procedures for installing the subdivision improvements required herein shall be as follows: 
(a)  When construction may begin. Construction and installation of any required public improvement shall not begin until the planning commission has given preliminary plat and development plan approval for the new subdivision. The subdivider shall then confer with the city engineer to determine the method and estimated cost of construction and installation of the required improvements. 
(b)  Inspections and approval. During the construction and installation of the required public improvements, the city engineer shall from time to time make field inspections and supervise said work as predetermined and agreed upon by the city engineer and the subdivider. After completion of all the construction and installation of the required public improvements and if the said work has met the city's specifications as determined by the city engineer, the city engineer shall notify the subdivider in writing of the approval of said work. 
(c)  Official acceptance by the city. The city may officially accept the completed work on the construction and installation of the written acceptance by the city engineer but not before approval by the planning commission of the final plat and/or "as built" plans which may be required. 
(d)  Cashier's checks. If the subdivider does not wish to construct any or all the required public improvements prior to submitting the subdivision plat to the planning commission for final approval, and a performance bond is not submitted, a cashier's check shall be required, such check being equal to the estimated cost of construction. When the work has been completed satisfactorily, the city shall release ninety (90) per cent of the funds with a letter of approval to the subdivider. The remaining ten (10) per cent shall apply toward the subdivider's required maintenance bond. The cost of any correct work required shall be deducted from these funds. 
(e)  Maintenance of completed work. The subdivider shall maintain his completed work until the approval by the city engineer for one year. A maintenance bond, except to the extent where a portion of such bond has been provided for under Section 9.14(d) is to be posted by the subdivider in an amount equal to ten (10) per cent of the construction cost. During the maintenance period, the city engineer shall make periodic inspections and notify the subdivider of necessary corrections. At the end of the maintenance period, the city engineer shall make a final inspection and report his findings to the city. Necessary corrections not made by the subdivider will be completed by the city. The cost of such corrections shall be deducted from the maintenance funds and/or collected from the subdivider and the bonding company. If the work is acceptable at the end of the maintenance period, the maintenance bond shall expire and/or any remaining funds shall be released to the subdivider. Said corrections shall not include vandalism and other damage beyond the control of the developer. 
Section 9.15. - Subdivider's responsibility. 
The subdivider shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements according to the following: 
(a)  Streets. Incur the cost for the construction of all street grading, paving, curb and gutters and storm drainage, which are required by these subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Utility system. Incur the cost for the installation of the utility distribution systems which is required to serve the new subdivisions and to tie with the existing utility system based on the Standard Design Specifications of the City. 
(c)  Sidewalks. Entire cost, if provided. 
(d)  Monuments. Entire cost. 
(e)  Street lighting. For an underground electrical distribution system, the developer shall pay one hundred (100) per cent of the cost of installation. For the installation of street lights and poles, the developer shall pay all costs above fifty (50) per cent of the cost of a twenty-five-foot bronze fiberglass pole with eight thousand five hundred fifty (8,550) lumen HPS light. 
(Ord. No. 83-16, § 1, 10-20-83; Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, 3-3-88) 
Section 9.16. - City's responsibility. 
The city shall participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of the required public improvements for the following conditions: 
(a)  Streets. The cost for any additional pavement which may be required in excess of the minimum paving requirements to serve the new subdivision. 
(b)  Utility system. Incur the cost for any difference in cost of oversized lines which may be needed in excess of the required utility facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by the city engineer. 
Section 9.17. - Property owner's responsibility. 
Whenever the city is petitioned by the property owners to upgrade the street to higher construction standards (as prescribed by Article V, Improvements, of Chapter 20 of the City Code), the property owner shall be assessed as follows: 
(a)  For street paving alone: Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total cost of said improvements, one-third ( 1/3 ) to be assessed against the abutting property owner on one side of the street and one-third ( 1/3 ) against the owner on the opposite side of the street. 
(b)  For paving, curb and gutter: One-half (½) of the total cost of said improvements, one-fourth (¼) to be assessed against the abutting property owner on one side of the street and one-fourth (¼) against the owner on the opposite side of the street. 
Section 9.18. - Estimated cost for construction and installation. 
The current unit prices in effect at the time of submission of plans plus ten (10) per cent shall be used in determining the total estimated cost for construction and installation of required public improvements in new subdivisions. 
ARTICLE 10. - ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 

Section 10.1. - Enforcing officer(s). 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced for the city by the platting officer and the planning commission who shall promptly notify the city in writing of all violations of these provisions. 
Section 10.2. - Approval required prior to sale or transfer of property. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the City of Dublin who transfers or sells, or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Laurens County shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by Section 69.9905, Code of Georgia Annotated. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the city council, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
THE EFFECTIVE DATE of this ordinance shall be the 14th day of May, 1981, and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
SO ORDAINED this 14th day of May, 1981, by a vote of 5 FOR and 0 AGAINST and approved by the Mayor. 
/s/ Robert E. Cochran,  Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ William B. Tarpley,  City Clerk 
First Reading: May 7, 1981 
Second Reading: May 14, 1981 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
 The ordinances of the City of Dublin were codified and published in 1978. At that time, statutory references in this volume were cited to the 1933 Code of Georgia. As pages are necessarily pulled for updating in the Supplement Service, state law references will be updated to reflect to 1981 Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A.). 
1933 Code of Georgia, Annotated 

 
1981 Code of Georgia, Annotated (or O.C.G.A.: Official Code of Georgia Annotated)

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1964 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1964 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1964 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1964 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1964 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 